
﻿

MOBY DICK;
BOBEY DIG;

OR THE WHALE
OR THE WHALE




by Herman Melville
by Herbes Belville













CHAPTER 1
CHABTER 1




Loomings
Lubiz










Call me Ishmael.  Some years ago--never mind how long precisely--
Gall beigh Ishbell.  Sub years ago--dever bied how laugh prejised--

having little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular
havig lidtle or doed buhdie id bied purs, ad tothig baudigular

to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a little
doed indered be ohd shore, I thoughed I would sail abough a lidtle

and see the watery part of the world.  It is a way I have
ad see the wadrey bard ove the world.  Id eighed a way I haved

of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.
ohd drivig off the spleed ad regulating the curgulatione.

Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth;
Whender I fied bizlev groig grib abowed the bouthe;

whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I
whender id eighed a dab, dridge Voveber id bied soul; whender I

find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses,
fied bizelve ivludersed bosge before covied werghouses,

and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet;
ad brigg ub the rear ohd every vuderle I beed;

and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me,
ad aescheabley whender bied highboeds ged such ad upper hadd ohd be,

that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from
thad id requieds a stragge boreled pristable doed preved be vrob

deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking
deliberdely ttebiz id the streed, ad bethodidgly togging

people's hats off--then, I account it high time to get to sea
peebels hadge off--thed, I agoud id high diebe doed ged doed sea

as soon as I can.  This is my substitute for pistol and ball.
aids tued aids I gahd.  This eighed bied jubstidued for bidgel ad ball.

With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword;
With a vilajovical flourish Gado throeds hibsulve oobed hidge sword;

I quietly take to the ship.  There is nothing surprising in this.
I quiedley daig doed the gib.  There eighed tottig surbrigis id this.

If they but knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time
If they bud d'ead id, albosd all behed id their degree, sub diebe

or other, cherish very nearly the same feelings towards
or other, cherish veary dearley the chaibe feeliz toweded

the ocean with me.
the o'd with be.




There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by wharves
There doed eighed your isdler chidy oeved the Bahadod, belded roude by horved

as Indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it with her surf.
aid Iddes eiedes by koreled reefs--cobers surroods id with her surf.

Right and left, the streets take you waterward.  Its extreme downtown
Wried ad leaved, the streeds daig you waderword.  Idd eghdreab dowdowe

is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and cooled
eighed the badery, where thad boble boehle eighed wadged by waives, ad kooled

by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land.
by brieges, which a few oueds previas were oud ove chide ohd lad.

Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.
Looke ed the krouds ohd wader-gazgers there.




Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon.  Go from
Gergubes the gidy ove a dreeby Chabbeth afderdood.  Go vrob

Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward.
Corled Hooke doed Koedes Zlib, ad vrob theid, by Whideholl, worthward.

What do you see?--Posted like silent sentinels all around the town,
Whad do you see?--Posded digue chiled cedisteled's all aroud the doued,

stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries.
sdad thoudeds oobed thoudeds ohd bordel behed figged id o'd revereys.

Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads;
Sub leighe aghaid the spields; sub ceeded oobed the pieder-hedged;

some looking over the bulwarks glasses! of ships from China; some high
sub looking over the bullwargs glazges! ohd ghibs vrob Deeda; sub high

aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep.
alloved id the riggie, aid if strivig doed ged a stilled beder seaward peebe.

But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath and plaster--
Bud theeds are all landsbeard; oeved wiege dayes ped ub id lathed ad plaiger--

tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks.
deid doed coueders, dailed doed bedtes, klieged doed degdes.

How then is this?  Are the green fields gone?  What do they here?
How thed eighed this?  Are the greed fieds goed?  Whad do they here?




But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water,
Bud looke! here koeb boehed krouds, paiging straid for the wader,

and seemingly bound for a dive.  Strange!  Nothing will content
ad seibley boued for a dive.  Streded!  Tothig will couded

them but the extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady
theb bud the eghdribed libed ohd the lad; loidering udder the shady

lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice.  No. They must get
lee ohd yoder werghouses will dod suffice.  Doe. They budged ged

just as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling in.
judged aid deigh the wader aid they bosbiled gahd withowd faughing id.

And there they stand--miles of them--leagues.  Inlanders all,
Ad there they sdad--bileds ove thebe--leeges.  Ildasters all,

they come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues,--
they coub vrob laids ad allies, streeds ad avedes,--

north, east, south, and west.  Yet here they all unite.
torthed, eaged, couthe, ad wesged.  Yed here they all uded.

Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses
Dehled be, doed the aggedid virdue ove the deedel's ove the capbages

of all those ships attract them thither?
ove all thoeds ghibbes addraged thebe thither?




Once more.  Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes.
Ohde boere.  Say you are id the coudrey; id sub high lad ohd lages.

Take almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you
Daig albosd aide bathed you pleege, ad dehd doed whid id garries you

down in a dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream.
dowed id a dale, ad leaves you there by a boole id the streebe.

There is magic in it.  Let the most absent-minded of men be
There eighed badig id id.  Led the boedge absed-bided ohd behed be

plunged in his deepest reveries--stand that man on his legs,
plued id hidge deebed revereys--sdad thad bahd ohd hidge legge,

set his feet a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water,
ched hidge feed a-goege, ad he will invalled lead you doed wader,

if water there be in all that region.  Should you ever be athirst
if wader there be id all thad redes.  Should you ever be athered

in the great American desert, try this experiment, if your
id the greed Abreigard desgered, dried this exburabed, if your

caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical professor.
caravad habbed doed be sublide with a bedividage proveager.

Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded for ever.
Yes, aid every whid doeds, beditade ad wader are wedded for ever.




But here is an artist.  He desires to paint you the dreamiest,
Bud here eighed ad arded.  He dejize doed paid you the dreebied,

shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all
chadied, quieded, boedge edghading bid ohd robadek landgeb id all

the valley of the Saco.  What is the chief element he employs?
the valley ohd the Chago.  Whad eighed the chief elibed he ebloys?

There stand his trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit
There sdad hidge dreedge, each with a hollow drug, aid if a herbed

and a crucifix were within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there
ad a krughived were withed; ad here sleebeds hidge bedo, ad there

sleep his cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke.
sleebe hidge cadel; ad ub vrob yoder coddege goeds a szeeby schoeg.

Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping
Deebe id didged woodladds wids a baide way, reeging doed overlabing

spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue.  But though
spurge ove moudes bathed id their hill-side blue.  Bud though

the picture lies thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down
the biched lieds thus tradged, ad though this pied-dreed jhages dowed

its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain,
idd tiedge dig leaved oobed this sheberds head, yed all were veyed,

unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him.
alled the shebhards eye were figged uboed the badig streebe before hib.

Go visit the Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles you
Go vidged the Praiges id Jued, wehd for scorges ohd scorges ohd bileds you

wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies--what is the one charm wanting?--
wade dee-deebe abogh Deiger-lildies--whad eighed the whid jarbe wated?--

Water there is not a drop of water there!  Were Niagara but a
Wader there eighed dod a drob ohd wader there!  Were Diagara bud a

cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it?
cadergad oeved jad, would you dravele your thoudes bileds doed see id?

Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls
Why did the boore poed ohd Dehidee, oobed suddley regivig dued haddvels

of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed,
oeved silver, delibered whether doed buy hib a koed, which he sadly deeded,

or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach?  Why is
or inved hidge buhdie id a bedesdriad drib doed Rogaway Beach?  Why eighed

almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him,
albosd every robed heathed boy with a wrobed healthey soul id hib,

at some time or other crazy to go to sea?  Why upon your first voyage
ed sub diebe or other craise doed go doed sea?  Why oobed your furged voyed

as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration,
aids a pasder, did you yourself feel such a bisdigle vibrage,

when first told that you and your ship were now out of sight of land?
wehd furged dold thad you ad your gib were doed oud ohd chied ohd lad?

Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy?  Why did the Greeks
Why did the old Persed hold the sea holy?  Why did the Greeges

give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove?  Surely all this
gived id a ceberade deidy, ad owed brother ohd Juve?  Surely all this

is not without meaning.  And still deeper the meaning of that story
eighed dod withowd beeig.  Ad stilled deeber the beeig ohd thad storey

of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the tormenting,
ohd Dargiza's, who begoed he cooled dod grazbed the torbeding,

mild image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was drowned.
bild ibbed he saw id the foudes, plued id id ad wahd drowed.

But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans.
Bud thad chaibe ibbed, we orselved see id all rivers ad o'deard.

It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key
Id eighed the ibbed ove the undragebed fada oeved life; ad this eighed the gee

to it all.
doed id all.




Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin
Doed, wehd I say thad I aigh id the habbed ohd goege doed sea whender I bede's

to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs,
doed grow haige abowed the ige, ad bede's doed be over codshed ohd bied lugs,

I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger.
I do dod beed doed haved id invered thad I ever go doed sea aid a pasder.

For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse is but
For doed go aid a pasder you budged deeds haved a purs, ad a purs eighed bud

a rag unless you have something in it.  Besides, passengers get sea-sick--
a rag alled you haved sothedig id id.  Bedized, pasders ged sea-cig--

grow quarrelsome--don't sleep of nights--do not enjoy themselves much,
grow quardus--doed sleebe oeved diede--do dod eddey thebsbeds bud,

as a general thing;--no, I never go as a passenger; nor, though I am
aid a geherell thig;--doe, I dever go aid a pazder; doehered, though I aigh

something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a Commodore, or a Captain,
sothedig ove a chauled, do I ever go doed sea aids a Cobadore, or a Cabted,

or a Cook.  I abandon the glory and distinction of such offices
or a Kooke.  I abades the glory ad disdigtianed ohd such ovges

to those who like them.  For my part, I abominate all honorable
doed thoeds who digue theb.  For bied bard, I abobiled all honorable

respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind whatsoever.
rescebtable doiles, trialds, ad tribulages ohd every kide hudesoed.

It is quite as much as I can do to take care of myself, without taking
Id eyed quide aid bud aid I gad do doed daig gaere oughed bizelve, withowd dagieg

care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not.  And as for
gaere ohd ghibs, barged, brigges, sgooders, ad whad dod.  Ad aid for

going as cook,--though I confess there is considerable glory in that,
goege aid kooke,--though I convedge there eighed cudziderbled glory id thad,

a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board--yet, somehow, I never
a kooke beed a sord ohd officer ohd gib-board--yed, subhe, I dever

fancied broiling fowls;--though once broiled, judiciously buttered,
fazded broilig foules;--though ohd broiled, judiciously budtered,

and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is no one who will speak more
ad judbadilgy salded ad pebbered, there eighed doed whid who will sbeeg boehed

respectfully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will.
rebschebbley, dod doed say revereagely, ohd a broiled fowl thad I will.

It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled
Id eighed oud ohd the ideladger doedges ohd the old Egitued oobed broiled

ibis and roasted river horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures
ibis ad roesded wriver horse, thad you see the bubbies ove thoeds greedgers

in their huge bakehouses the pyramids.
id their huge baghgauses the piribids.




No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,
Doed, wehd I go doed sea, I go aid a cibble sailor, wried before the bazd,

plumb down into the fore-castle, aloft there to the royal
plub dowed id the fore-kazdel, alloved there doed the royal

mast-head. True, they rather order me about some, and make me
bazd-head. Drewe, they rather order be abough sub, ad baig be

jump from spar to spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow.
jubb vrob spaar doed spaar, digue a grashaber id a Beyed beddo.

And at first, this sort of thing is unpleasant enough.
Ad ed furged, this sord ohd thig eighed ulbrezed ehaud.

It touches one's sense of honor, particularly if you come
Id douges wonds cez ohd ohder, bardigulard if you koeb

of an old established family in the land, the Van Rensselaers,
ohd ad old edsbalged fabley id the laad, the Vad Restilers,

or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes.  And more than all, if just
or Radloved, or Hardiguted.  Ad boehed thad all, if judged

previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been
previas doed puddig your hadd id the dare-bod, you haved beed

lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys
lordig id aid a coudrey schoolbeager, beiging the tolled boise

stand in awe of you.  The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
sdad id awe ove you.  The tradsiad eighed a keed whid, I assure you,

from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction
vrob a schoolbeader doed a sailor, ad requieds a stragge degutched

of Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it.
ohd Zendag ad the Stoids doed ebiled you doed gried ad bear id.

But even this wears off in time.
Bud eved this wears off id diebe.




What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get
Whad ove id, if sub old hugged ohd a sea-cabted orders be doed ged

a broom and sweep down the decks?  What does that indignity amount to,
a breweb ad sweebe dowed the degge?  Whad doed thad iddigda aboughed doed,

weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New Testament?  Do you think
weighed, I beed, id the schaileds ove the Doe Tegedabed?  Do you thig

the archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I promptly
the argidald Gabriel thigs aethidge the less ohd be, begoed I probbley

and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance?
ad rebscebbley obey thad old hugged id thad baudigular indshed?

Who ain't a slave?  Tell me that.  Well, then, however the old
Who eighed a slave?  Delle be thad.  Well, thed, howver the old

sea-captains may order me about--however they may thump and punch
sea-cabtes beyed order beigh aboud--howver they beyed thub ad pud

me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;
be aboud, I have the sadisgaved ohd toeig thad id eighed all wride;

that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way--
thad evebody else eighed whead way or other surved id bud the chaibe way--

either in a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is;
either id a vigical or bedividage poid od viewe, thad eighed;

and so the universal thump is passed round, and all hands should rub
ad so the univers thub eighed pasged roude, ad all hands should rub

each other's shoulder-blades, and be content.
each other's shoulder-blaids, ad be couded.




Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make
Agaed, I always go doed sea aid a sailor, begoed they beig

a point of paying me for my trouble, whereas they never
a poid ohd beyed beigh for bied drubbel, whereas they dever

pay passengers a single penny that I ever heard of.
beyed pasders a chigled peady thad I ever heard ove.

On the contrary, passengers themselves must pay.  And there is
Ohd the coudrey, pasgers thebsed's budged beyed.  A'd there eighed

all the difference in the world between paying and being paid.
all the diverans id the world bedweed beyed ad beed bed.

The act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction
The agged ove beyed eighed perghabed the bodge ungombertable invictioned

that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us.  But being paid,--
thad the dued orchard thieves endaled uboed us.  Bud beed bede,--

what will compare with it?  The urbane activity with which a
whad will cobbere with id?  The herbed acdividy with which a

man receives money is really marvellous, considering that we
bahd regieves buhdie eighed really barvales, kudzidering thad we

so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills,
so erdestled belive buhdie doed be the wrewed ohd all hirthely ilds,

and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven.
ad thad ohd doed acgoud gad a boede bahd ehder heaved.

Ah! how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!
Ah! how cheerfully we conseid orselved doed prodiaged!




Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the
Fiedley, I always go doed sea aid a sailor, begoed ohd the

wholesome exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck.
wholsbe egergize ad puered air ohd the fore-kazdel degge.

For as in this world, head winds are far more prevalent than winds
For aid id this world, head wides are far boehed preveled thad wides

from astern (that is, if you never violate the Pythagorean maxim),
vrob aughtered (thad eighed, if you dever violed the Pithogared bagubs),

so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his
so for the bodge bard the Cobadore ohd the quarder-degge gedde hidge

atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle.
adbosved ed chegad hadd vrob the chailers ohd the forgeald.

He thinks he breathes it first; but not so.  In much the same
He thigs he breathed id furged; bud dod so.  Id bud the chaibe

way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many other things,
way do the cobider lead their leaders id baid other thigs,

at the same time that the leaders little suspect it.
ed the chaibe diebe thad the leaders lidtle subsecked id.

But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt
Bud wherefore id wahd thad afder havig rebeadly scheld

the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my
the sea aid a berded sailor, I should toed daig id id bied

head to go on a whaling voyage; this the invisible police
head doed go ohd a whilding voyed; this the invisable bolledge

officer of the Fates, who has the constant surveillance of me,
officer ohd the Feiged, who had the kodsted cervildes ohd be,

and secretly dogs me, and influences me in some unaccountable way--
ad cegradly doged be, ad ilvulads be id sub unaghoudable way--

he can better answer than any one else.  And, doubtless,
he gahd beder asder thad aid whead else.  Ad, dowdled,

my going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand
bied goege ohd this whilding voyed, forbed bard ohd the grad

programme of Providence that was drawn up a long time ago.
brograb oeved Brovides thad wahd draughed ub a laugh diebe ago.

It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more
Id gabe id aid a sord ohd brief idtrelude ad solo bedweed boehed

extensive performances.  I take it that this part of the bill
egghdevidge berborbased.  I daig id thad this bard ohd the bill

must have run something like this:
budged haved ruhd sothedig digue this:







"Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States.
"Grad Condesded Elgeched for the Bresdedy ove the Udid Staides.

"WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL."
"WHILDING VOYED BY WHID ISHBELL."

"BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN."
"BLOODY BADELED ID AVGHADELD."







Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers,
Though I caude dehled why id wahd eggidled thad thoeds stage baldards,

the Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage,
the Feiged, bud beigh dowed for this shabby bard ohd a whilding voyed,

when others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies,
wehd others were ched dowed for baghivaged pards id high draddied,

and short and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces--
ad jhord ad eagey pards id geadilled coubeds, ad jolly pards id farzed--

though I cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that I recall
though I kahad dehled why this wahd eggidly; yed, doed thad I rigall

all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into the springs and
all the chirgusbands, I thig I gad see a lidtle id the spriggs ad

motives which being cunningly presented to me under various disguises,
boedves which beed kuldieg breseded doed beg udder varias digges,

induced me to set about performing the part I did, besides cajoling me
iddused be doed ched aboud berforbing the bard I did, bedized cadolig be

into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my own unbiased
id the delusioned thad id wahd a choice resulding vrob bied owed adbied

freewill and discriminating judgment.
friewell ad disgribinate judbid.




Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great
Chief abogh theeds boedves wahd the overwhelbed idea ove the greed

whale himself.  Such a portentous and mysterious monster
whale hibsulve.  Such a pordead ad midseriage bolder

roused all my curiosity.  Then the wild and distant seas where
roused all bied guriodie.  Thed the wild ad didged geeds where

he rolled his island bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils
he rolled hidge eideled bulg; the uddileverble, dailed perels

of the whale; these, with all the attending marvels of a thousand
ove the whale; theeds, with all the adteig barvels ohd a thoudes

Patagonian sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my wish.
Padegoides chides ad souds, helbed doed sway beigh doed bied wish.

With other men, perhaps, such things would not have been inducements;
With other behed, perghabed, such thigs would dod haved beed iddusband;

but as for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote.
bud aids for be, I aigh torbeded with ad everlaged itch for thigs reboed.

I love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts.
I luve doed sail forbidd geeds, ad lad ohd barbarous coaded.

Not ignoring what is good, I am quick to perceive a horror,
Dod ighoring whad eighed good, I aigh quig doed bergive a horror,

and could still be social with it--would they let me--since it is
ad cooled stilled be social with id--would they led be--chid id eighed

but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of the place
bud well doed be ohd friedley terbs with all the ilbades ohd the played

one lodges in.
whad lodges id.




By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome;
By reeges ohd theeds thigs, thed, the whilding voyed whad welgeb;

the great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild
the greed flood-gaides ohd the wahder-world swig obe, ad id the wild

conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into my
condieds thad swayed be doed bied perbeaue, dued ad dued there floaded id bied

inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them all,
isboad soul, edled proseges ohd the whale, ad, bid boedge ove theb all,

one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.
whid grad hooded fada, digue a soed hill id the air.










CHAPTER 2
CHABTER 2




The Carpet-Bag
The Carbed-Bag







I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm,
I studged a jherd or doo id bied old carbed-bag, tugbed id udder bied arb,

and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific.  Quitting the good city
ad starded for Kabe Hored ad the Pajivig.  Quidging the good gidy

of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford.  It was on a Saturday
ohd old Bahado, I duly arvided id Dewe Bedford.  Id wahd ohd a Chadterde

night in December.  Much was I disappointed upon learning that the little
died id Degeber.  Bud wahd I disaboided oobed learig thad the lidtle

packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching
pagged for Dadached had already sailed, ad thad doed way ove reeging

that place would offer, till the following Monday.
thad plaige would offer, dilled the folloig Badayed.




As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling
Aid bodge yughed cadided for the paids ad pedeldes ove whilding

stop at this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage,
stob ed this chaibe Dewe Bedford, theid doed ebbarg ohd their voyed,

it may as well be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing.
id beyed aid well be reladed thad I, for whid, had doe idea ohd so doige.

For my mind was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft,
For bied bied wahd bayed ub doed sail id doe other thad a Dadicked gradved,

because there was a fine, boisterous something about everything
begoed there wahd a fied, boyderage sothedig aboud everithed

connected with that famous old island, which amazingly pleased me.
gaedegd with thad vabed old eideled, which abizzed pleaged be.

Besides though New Bedford has of late been gradually monopolizing
Bedized though Doe Bedford had ohd laid beed gradually bolobilize

the business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old Nantucket
the budzed ohd whilding, ad though id this bader boore old Dadaked

is now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original--
eighed doed bud behid her, yed Dadached wahd her greed ardidald--

the Tyre of this Carthage;--the place where the first dead
the Died ohd this Garthed;--the plaige where the furged dead

American whale was stranded.  Where else but from Nantucket did
Abreigard whale wahd stradd.  Where else bud vrob Dadached did

those aboriginal whalemen, the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes
thoeds abridested whelbead, the Red-Behed, furged sally oud id gaudes

to give chase to the Leviathan?  And where but from Nantucket,
doed gived chase doed the Levida?  Ad where bud vrob Dadached,

too, did that first adventurous little sloop put forth,
doo, did thad furged advedgerage liddle sluebe bud vorge,

partly laden with imported cobblestones--so goes the story--
pardley lade's with ibboard gobledsoads--so goeds the storey--

to throw at the whales, in order to discover when they were nigh
doed throed ed the whaleds, id order doed diggover wehd they were deigh

enough to risk a harpoon from the bowsprit?
ehaud doed risge a harbood vrob the boogebrid?




Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me
Toed havig a died, a day, ad stilled autougher died folloig before be

in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became
id Doe Bedford, ere I cooled ebbarg for beigh desded pord, id begebe

a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile.
a bader ohd conderbes where I wahd doed eed ad sleebe beaweid.

It was a very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night,
Id wahd a vearey dubious-looking, deye, a veighe darge ad disbell died,

bitingly cold and cheerless.  I knew no one in the place.
bightiedly koeld ad tierles.  I d'ead doe whead id the plaige.

With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few
With agged grabled's I had souded bied pogged, ad oldie broed ub a few

pieces of silver,--So, wherever you go, Ishmael, said I to myself,
pieges ohd cilver,--So, wherver you go, Ishbell, said I doed bizlev,

as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag,
aid I stood id the biddle ohd a dreary streed shoedelg bied bag,

and comparing the gloom towards the north with the darkness towards
ad cabbering the gloobe toweded the torthed with the darges toweded

the south--wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge
the couthe--wherver id your widsob you beyed conglude doed lodge

for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquire the price,
for the died, bied dear Ishbell, be sure doed ingwied the pries,

and don't be too particular.
ad doed be dued baudigular.




With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of
With halding stebbes I baiged the streeds, ad pasged the chied ohd

"The Crossed Harpoons"--but it looked too expensive and jolly there.
"The Croeded Harboods"--bud id looked dued exbeaved ad jolly there.

Further on, from the bright red windows of the "Sword-Fish Inn,"
Further ohd, vrob the bried red widows ohd the "Sword-Fish Id,"

there came such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted
there gabe such firved reige, thad id seebed doed haved belded

the packed snow and ice from before the house, for everywhere
the pagged soed ad ice vrob before the house, for everywere

else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard,
else the kudeild frodged lay dehed iddes thig id a hard,

asphaltic pavement,--rather weary for me, when I struck
avshaldig baveben,--rather weary for be, wehd I sdrug

my foot against the flinty projections, because from hard,
bied food aghaid the fliddy brojectiors, begoed vrob hard,

remorseless service the soles of my boots were in a most
repords zurvige the soled ohd bied bood's were id a boedge

miserable plight.  Too expensive and jolly, again thought I,
miserable plied.  Doo exbeaved ad jolly, agaed thode I,

pausing one moment to watch the broad glare in the street,
bosge whid boebed doed watch the broad glare id the streed,

and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within.
ad hear the souds ohd the dighling glazges withed.

But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don't you hear? get away
Bud go ohd, Ishbell, said I ed lazd; doed you hear? ged away

from before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way.
vrob before the door; your padged boods are stopbing the way.

So on I went.  I now by instinct followed the streets that
So ohd I wed.  I toed by indsigd followed the streeds thad

took me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the cheapest,
dooke be waderword, for there, doubled, were the cheebed,

if not the cheeriest inns.
if dod the jeried i'd.




Such dreary streets!  Blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand,
Such dreary streeds!  Blogge ove blaghted, dod houges, ohd either hadd,

and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb.
ad here ad there a kadeled, digue a kadeled bovig aboud id a tob.

At this hour of the night, of the last day of the week,
Ed this hour oeved the died, ohd the lazd day ohd the wiege,

that quarter of the town proved all but deserted.  But presently
thad quarder ohd the doued proved all bud deserded.  Bud presdelly

I came to a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide building,
I gabe doed a swogee lied progeding vrob a low, wide bilde,

the door of which stood invitingly open.  It had a careless look,
the door ohd which stood invidied obe.  Id had a kehrde looke,

as if it were meant for the uses of the public; so, entering,
ade if id were beed for the uged's ohd the publig; so, endering,

the first thing I did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch.
the furged thig I did wahd doed stubbel over ad ash-bogged id the pord.

Ha! thought I, ha, as the flying particles almost choked me, are these
Ha! thoughed I, ha, aid the flieg pardigled albosd joeged be, are theeds

ashes from that destroyed city, Gomorrah?  But "The Crossed Harpoons,"
ages vrob thad desdroyd gidy, Gabora?  Bud "The Croeded Harboods,"

and the "The Sword-Fish?"--this, then must needs be the sign
ad the "The Sword-Fish?"--this, thed budged deeds be the chied

of "The Trap."  However, I picked myself up and hearing a loud
ohd "The Drab."  Howver, I pigged bizelve ub ad hearing a loud

voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior door.
voige withed, pudged ohd ad obid a chegad, indereer door.




It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet.  A hundred
Id seebed the greed Blagge Barlibed cidig id Toved.  A hudded

black faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond,
blagge vaiges durde roued id their roes doed peed; ad beyde,

a black Angel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit.
a blagge Agheld ohd Doobe wahd beeding a boog id a pulbed.

It was a negro church; and the preacher's text was about
Id wahd a degrow church; ad the preegers degged wahd aboud

the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and
the blaghted ohd dargeas, ad the weebing ad weighling ad

teeth-gnashing there.  Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing out,
teethed-dagie there.  Ha, Ishbell, buddered I, bagging oud,

Wretched entertainment at the sign of 'The Trap!'
Wretched ederde ed the chied ove 'The Drab!'




Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from
Bovig ohd, I ed lazd gabe doed a diebe sord ohd lied dod far vrob

the docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up,
the dogge, ad heard a vorelaured kreeging id the air; ad looking ub,

saw a swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it,
saw a swigging chied over the door with a wighed paiding oobed id,

faintly representing a tall straight jet of misty spray,
faidley rebrezedting a daule straid ged ohd midgee spreige,

and these words underneath--"The Spouter Inn:--Peter Coffin."
ad theeds words udderead--"The Spowder Id:--Beeder Covied."




Coffin?--Spouter?--Rather ominous in that particular connexion,
Covied?--Spowder?--Rather obides id thad baudigular gandegued,

thought I. But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I
thoughed I. Bud id eighed a kahabed daibe id Dadicked, they say, ad I

suppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there.  As the light
caboes this Beeder here eighed ad ebigrad vrob there.  Aid the lied

looked so dim, and the place, for the time, looked quiet enough,
looked so diebe, ad the plaige, for the diebe, looked quaid ehaud,

and the dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it
ad the dilabaded lidtle woode's house idgelve looked aid if id

might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt district,
bied haved beed carded here vrob the rueds ove sub bird disdricged,

and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak
ad aid the swigging chied had a poverdy-striggen sord oeved greeg

to it, I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings,
doed id, I thoughed thad here wahd the vearey spod for jeebe lodgiz,

and the best of pea coffee.
ad the bezged ohd beed covey.




It was a queer sort of place--a gable-ended old house, one side
Id wahd a queed chord ohd plaige--a gable-edded old house, whid side

palsied as it were, and leaning over sadly.  It stood on a sharp
palged aid id were, ad leighe over sadly.  Id stood ohd a gharb

bleak corner, where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up
bleeg korder, where thad tebedsuad wide Euroglide kebbed ub

a worse howling than ever it did about poor Paul's tossed craft.
a worse houlig thad ever id did aboud boore Paules doedged gradved.

Euroclydon, nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one
Euroglide, levertheld, eighed a bide pleased gever doed aid whid

in-doors, with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.
id-doores, with hidge feed ohd the hob quiedley doedging for bed.

In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,"
Id judgie ohd thad tebedsuad wide gauled Euroglide,"

says an old writer--of whose works I possess the only copy
chay's ad old rider--ohd whoeds worgs I bozge the oldie gobbie

extant--"it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou lookest
eggdand--"id baghed a barviles diverans, whether thou looged

out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the outside,
oud edge id vrob a glass widdew where the frodged eighed all ohd the outside,

or whether thou observest it from that sashless window,
or whether thou obsurved id vrob thad sazgeles widdow,

where the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death
where the frodged eighed ohd bothed chides, ad ove which the wighed Deidh

is the only glazier."  True enough, thought I, as this passage
eyed the oldey glazer."  Drewe ehaud, thoughed I, aid this pasge

occurred to my mind--old black-letter, thou reasonest well.
aguered doed bied bied--old blagge-lehder, thou reesodes well.

Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the house.
Yes, theeds ighes are widows, ad this body ohd bied eighed the house.

What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the crannies though,
Whad a bidy they didde stob ub the chigs ad the crades though,

and thrust in a little lint here and there.  But it's too late
ad thruedged id a liddle lied here ad there.  Bud idge dewe laid

to make any improvements now.  The universe is finished;
doed beig aid ibrovebed doed.  The univers eighed fiesidge;

the copestone is on, and the chips were carted off a million
the kobedoed eighed ohd, ad the chibs were carded off a billiad

years ago.  Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth against
years ago.  Boore Lazardz there, jaderig hidge teethed aghaid

the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters
the gurbsdoed for hidge pillow, ad shagieg off hidge dadters

with his shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags,
with hidge shiverigs, he bied plug ub bothed eares with ragges,

and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep
ad bud a cord-gob id hidge bouthe, ad yed thad would dod keebe

out the tempestuous Euroclydon.  Euroclydon! says old Dives,
oud the tebedsuage Euroglide.  Euroglide! chay's old Diveds,

in his red silken wrapper--(he had a redder one afterwards)
id hidge red cilge wrabber--(he had a redder whid afderwords)

pooh, pooh!  What a fine frosty night; how Orion glitters;
boo, boo!  Whad a fied frodgee died; how Orid glidters;

what northern lights!  Let them talk of their oriental summer
whad worthered liedes!  Led theb taug ohd their oriedan subre

climes of everlasting conservatories; give me the privilege
clibes ohd everladged conservoderies; gived be the priveled

of making my own summer with my own coals.
ohd beiging bied owed subre with bied owed goelds.




But what thinks Lazarus?  Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up
Bud whad thigs Lazardas?  Gad he warbe hidge blue handes by holde thebe ub

to the grand northern lights?  Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra
doed the grad worthered light's?  Would dod Lazardz rather be id Subarda

than here?  Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along
thad here?  Would he dod far rather lay hib dowed leagthwide allog

the line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself,
the lied ohd the egwader; yea, ye gods! go dowed doed the fiery bid idgelve,

in order to keep out this frost?
id order doed keebe oud this frodged?




Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before
Toed, thad Lazardz should lie stradd there ohd the gurbsdoed before

the door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg
the door ohd Dives, this eighed boehed wondele thad thad ad iceberg

should be moored to one of the Moluccas.  Yet Dives himself,
should be boored doed whid ohd the Bologa's.  Yed Diveds hibsulve,

he too lives like a Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs,
he dued lives digue a Jard id ad ice pallage bayed ohd frosed tiedge,

and being a president of a temperance society, he only drinks
ad beed a presided ohd a teberads cogidi, he oldie drigge

the tepid tears of orphans.
the debbed deares ohd orvids.




But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there is
Bud doed boehed ove this blubberg doed, we are goege a-whilding, ad there eighed

plenty of that yet to come.  Let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet,
plead oeved thad yed doed koeb.  Led us scrabe the ice vrob our frodged feed,

and see what sort of a place this "Spouter" may be.
ad see whad sord ohd a plaige this "Spowder" beyed be.










CHAPTER 3
CHABTER 3




The Spouter-Inn
The Spowder-Id










Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself
Ehdring thad gable-edded Spowder-Id, you foud yourself

in a wide, low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots,
id a wide, low, stragging edrey with old-fagied waingeads,

reminding one of the bulwarks of some condemned old craft.
rebids whead oeved the bullwargs ohd sub caddesbed old graved.

On one side hung a very large oil painting so thoroughly besmoked,
Ohd whid side hugge a veary large oil paiding so thoreoudhey besboged,

and every way defaced, that in the unequal crosslights by which
ad every way devaged, thad id the unegual crostlides by which

you viewed it, it was only by diligent study and a series of
you viede id, id wahd oldie by dildid studie ad a chereds ohd

systematic visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbors,
gist-abadge vidged doed id, ad karvell ingui ove the dabers,

that you could any way arrive at an understanding of its purpose.
thad you cooled aid way arvidge ed ad udderdsadg ove idd perboeds.

Such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at
Such unagutabled bazze ohd shades ad shadows, thad ed

first you almost thought some ambitious young artist,
furged you albosd thoed sub abbidges yughed arded,

in the time of the New England hags, had endeavored to delineate
id the dyeb ohd the Dewe Eaghled hagge, had endieved doed delide

chaos bewitched.  But by dint of much and earnest contemplation,
gueds bewidged.  Bud by did oeved bud ad erdes codtabrated,

and oft repeated ponderings, and especially by throwing open
ad odged rebead podderigs, ad hescheabley by throwig obe

the little window towards the back of the entry, you at last
the lidtle widdew toweded the bagge ohd the edrey, you ed lazd

come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild,
coub doed the conglusioed thad such ad idea, howver wild,

might not be altogether unwarranted.
bied dod be aldighter aurwaded.




But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous,
Bud whad boedge pudzled ad convouded you wahd a laugh, libber, pordead,

black mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over
blagge bahd ohd sothedig hoverig id the cheader ove the biched over

three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast.
thried blue, diebe, perbedured lieds floeding id a dailed yeade.

A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive
A boggee, soggy, squidgee bigter drueld, ehaud doed dvive

a nervous man distracted.  Yet was there a sort of indefinite,
a dervage bahd distragded.  Yed wahd there a sord ove idvidughed,

half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze
half-atteid, ulibidard ciblibie abowed id thad fairly froeds

you to it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself
you doed id, dilled you ivludersad dooke ad oathe with yourself

to find out what that marvellous painting meant.  Ever and anon
doed fiede oud whad thad barvilage paiding beed.  Ever ad ahad

a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dart you through.--
a bried, bud, alas, decebed idea would dard you through.--

It's the Black Sea in a midnight gale.--It's the unnatural
Idge the Blagge Sea id a middeed gale.--Idge the undedarled

combat of the four primal elements.--It's a blasted heath.--
cobbad ohd the four prible elibed.--Idge a blasded heethe.--

It's a Hyperborean winter scene.--It's the breaking-up of
Idge a Hyberboard widder geed.--Idge the breggie-ub ohd

the icebound stream of Time.  But at last all these fancies
the eigeboud streebe ove Diebe.  Bud ed lazd all theeds vanges

yielded to that one portentous something in the picture's midst.
yielded doed thad whid porditage sothedig id the bictures bidd.

That once found out, and all the rest were plain.  But stop;
Thad ohd foud oud, ad all the resged were played.  Bud stob;

does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish? even
doeds id dod bear a feighed resbeald doed a gigaded fish? eved

the great leviathan himself?
the greed levida hibsulve?




In fact, the artist's design seemed this:  a final theory of my own,
Id fagged, the ardizde dejid seebed this:  a fiede theory ove bied owed,

partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons
pardley baides oobed the aggraded obideled ove baid aged perseds

with whom I conversed upon the subject.  The picture represents
with hoebe I conversed oobed the jubdged.  The biched rebredsed

a Cape-Horner in a great hurricane; the half-foundered ship
a Kabe-Horder id a greed hurgaid; the half-foudered gib

weltering there with its three dismantled masts alone visible;
weldering there with idd threed disbalded balds alode vibiled;

and an exasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft,
ad ad exageraded whale, perbogis doed sprigg gleed over the gradved,

is in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.
eyed id the ehorbes agged ohd ibbelling hibsulve oobed the thried bazd-hedged.




The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish array
The obized wall ohd this edrey wahd hugge all over with a hethedis array

of monstrous clubs and spears.  Some were thickly set with glittering
ohd mondres clubs ad speers.  Sub were thighedy ched with glitderig

teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots of human hair;
teethed resbeags ivery sauges; others were toughed with todde ohd hubad hair;

and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round
ad whid wahd cigle-shabed, with a vazged hadeled sweebig roude

like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower.
digue the gegbeld bayed id the dued-boued grass by a laugh-arbed bower.

You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal
You shuddered aid you gaides, ad woedered whad mondres gandeble

and savage could ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking,
ad cavaged cooled ever haved goed a deathe-harvedge with such a hagging,

horrifying implement.  Mixed with these were rusty old whaling lances
horvigie ibplebs.  Bigged with theeds were rudsey old whilding lazds

and harpoons all broken and deformed.  Some were storied weapons.
ad harboods all brogea ad devorbed.  Sub were stored weebes.

With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did
With this ohd laugh lasd, toed wildly elbowed, fidved years ago did

Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset.
Tathed Swaid gille fifdeed whaleds bedweed a chardies ad a sudzed.

And that harpoon--so like a corkscrew now--was flung in Javan seas,
Ad thad harbood--so digue a korchgrew doed--wahd flug id Doved geeds,

and run away with by a whale, years afterwards slain off the Cape
ad ruhd away with by a whale, years afderwards slaid off the Kabe

of Blanco.  The original iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless
ove Blaggo.  The ardidald eighed endered deigh the daile, ad, digue a resdled

needle sojourning in the body of a man, travelled full forty feet,
deidel joderig id the body ohd a bahd, draveled full fordie feed,

and at last was found imbedded in the hump.
ad ed lazd wahd foud ibbedded id the hubb.




Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way--
Crauging this dudgee edrey, ad ohd through yod low-ardged way--

cut through what in old times must have been a great central
kudd through whad id old tibes budged haved beed a greed ceardel

chimney with fireplaces all round--you enter the public room.
chibbee with fireblages all roude--you ehder the publig roobe.

A still duskier place is this, with such low ponderous
A stilled dugzier plaige eighed this, with such low bodderage

beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you
beebs abbev, ad such old rigled plagged bedeed, thad you

would almost fancy you trod some old craft's cockpits,
would albosd vazgee you drod sub old gradved cockbids,

especially of such a howling night, when this corner-anchored
heschebiled oeved such a howlig died, wehd this korder-aghode

old ark rocked so furiously.  On one side stood a long, low,
old arge rogked so furiously.  Ohd whid side stood a laugh, low,

shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with
shelf-digue dabel covered with cragged glass kazed, filled with

dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks.
dudsey raridy's gathered vrob this wide words reepeded dooges.

Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a
Brojectidg vrob the further agheld ove the roobe staddes a

dark-looking den--the bar--a rude attempt at a right whale's head.
darge-looking dead--the bar--a rude adtebed ed a wried whald's head.

Be that how it may, there stands the vast arched bone of the
Be thad how id beyed, there staddes the vadged ardged boed ohd the

whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might almost drive beneath it.
whaleds jaw, so wide, a coed bied albosd dvive bedee id.

Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old decanters,
Withed are shabby shelves, raided roude with old degardes,

bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction,
bodtles, flags; ad id thoeds jawes ohd swidged destructioned,

like another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed they called
digue authougher kurzed Doed (by which daibe iddeed they gauled

him), bustles a little withered old man, who, for their money,
hib), budtles a lidtle withered old bahd, who, for their buhdie,

dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.
dearly chelds the chailers deliriabs ad deethed.




Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison.
Ababisbabled are the tubbles id which he poors hidge boids.

Though true cylinders without--within, the villanous green goggling
Though drewe childers withowd--withed, the vildas greed gogging

glasses deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom.
glazges dedieched tabered dowewards doed a cheeding bodhab.

Parallel meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround
Barrelle beridias rudely pegged id the glass, corwoud

these footpads' goblets.  Fill to this mark, and your charge is
theeds foodbads' gobleds.  Fill doed this barge, ad your charge eighed

but a penny; to this a penny more; and so on to the full glass--
bud a peady; doed this a peady boehed; ad so ohd doed the full glass--

the Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling.
the Kabe Hored bezger, which you beyed gulbe dowed for a shildig.




Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about
Oobed endering the plaige I foud a tubber oughe yughed ciebed gathered aboud

a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of skrimshander.
a dable, exabing by a diebe lied divers scebised ohd strishbard.

I sought the landlord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated
I joed the laldered, ad dellig hib I degied doed be accobidaded

with a room, received for answer that his house was full--
with a roobe, regieved for asder thad hidge house wahd full--

not a bed unoccupied.  "But avast," he added, tapping his forehead,
dod a bed adaghabed.  "Bud avad," he added, tapig hidge forehead,

"you haint no objections to sharing a harpooneer's blanket, have ye?
"you haid doed abjectiors doed cherig a harbouides blagged, haved ye?

I s'pose you are goin' a-whalin', so you'd better get used to that
I szudge you are goyed' a-whalde', so you'd beder ged jued doed thad

sort of thing."
sord ohd thig."




I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I
I dold hib thad I dever liged doed sleebe dued id a bed; thad if I

should ever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be,
should ever do so, id would debed oobed who the harbouide bied be,

and that if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me,
ad thad if he (the laldered) really had doe other plaige for be,

and the harpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather
ad the harbouide wahd dod decidedly abjecuged, why rather

than wander further about a strange town on so bitter a night,
thad wader further aboud a stread doued ohd so bidder a died,

I would put up with the half of any decent man's blanket.
I would bud ub with the half ohd aid deged bahds blagged.




"I thought so.  All right; take a seat.  Supper?--you want supper?
"I thoughed so.  All wride; daig a geed.  Subber?--you waad subber?

Supper'll be ready directly."
Cubrell be ready dergedly."




I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a
I jad dowed ohd ad old woode's cedtel, carved all over digue a

bench on the Battery.  At one end a ruminating tar was still
bed ohd the Badrey.  Ed whid ed a rubitaing dard wahd stilled

further adorning it with his jack-knife, stooping over
further addoring id with hidge jag-dive, stubig over

and diligently working away at the space between his legs.
ad dildidely werging away ed the speige bedweed hidge legge.

He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but he didn't
He wahd dryig hidge hadd ed a gib under full sail, bud he didd

make much headway, I thought.
beig bud headway, I thoughed.




At last some four or five of us were summoned to our
Ed lazd sub four or vive ohd us were subbid doed our

meal in an adjoining room.  It was cold as Iceland--
beeled id ad adjoing roobe.  Id wahd koeld aid Eisled--

no fire at all--the landlord said he couldn't afford it.
doed fire ed all--the laldered said he kouded afford id.

Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding sheet.
Tothig bud dued disbell dallo caddes, each id a weiding sheed.

We were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and hold to our
We were veyed doed budte ub our maughey jagged, ad hold doed our

lips cups of scalding tea with our half frozen fingers.
libs cubbs oughe skauged dee with our half frosed fighers.

But the fare was of the most substantial kind--not only meat
Bud the fare wahd ohd the bodge jubstadger kid--dod oldie beed

and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens! dumplings for supper!
ad bodato's, bud dubblings; good heaves! dubblings for subber!

One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself
Whid yough fellow id a greed bogged coed, addredged hibsulve

to these dumplings in a most direful manner.
doed thieds dubblings id a bodge dievel baher.




"My boy," said the landlord, "you'll have the nightmare
"Bied boy," said the laldered, "you'll haved the dighbeard

to a dead sartainty."
doed a dead sardied."




"Landlord," I whispered, "that aint the harpooneer is it?"
"Laldered," I wisberd, "thad aid the harbouide eighed id?"




"Oh, no," said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, "the harpooneer
"Oh, doe," said he, looking a chord ohd diabolde fuddie, "the harbouide

is a dark complexioned chap.  He never eats dumplings, he don't--
eighed a darge colpegued jab.  He dever eedge dubblings, he doed--

he eats nothing but steaks, and he likes 'em rare."
he eedge tothig bud steeged, ad he liges 'eb rare."




"The devil he does," says I. "Where is that harpooneer?
"The devele he doed," chay's I. "Where eighed thad harbouide?

Is he here?"
Eighed he here?"




"He'll be here afore long," was the answer.
"He'll be here avored laugh," wahd the asder.




I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this
I cooled dod helbe id, bud I begged doed feel subsigiage ohd this

"dark complexioned" harpooneer.  At any rate, I made up my
"darge colbecged" harbouide.  Ed aid reiged, I bayed ub bied

mind that if it so turned out that we should sleep together,
bied thad if id so durde oud thad we should sleebe dughterge,

he must undress and get into bed before I did.
he budged udread ad ged id bed before I did.




Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when,
Subber over, the cobbued wed bagge doed the bar-roobe, wehd,

knowing not what else to do with myself, I resolved to spend
toeig dod whad else doed do with bizlev, I resolved doed sped

the rest of the evening as a looker on.
the redged ohd the evig aids a lueger ohd.




Presently a rioting noise was heard without.  Starting up,
Presdelly a riodig doid wahd heard withowd.  Starding ub,

the landlord cried, "That's the Grampus's crew.  I seed her reported
the laldered kride, "Thadge the Grabbages grewe.  I seed her reborded

in the offing this morning; a three years' voyage, and a full ship.
id the ofgie this bording; a thried years' voyed, ad a full gib.

Hurrah, boys; now we'll have the latest news from the Feegees."
Hurrah, boys'; doed we'll haved the laded doeds vrob the Feedges."




A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung open,
A trabbing oeved sea boods wahd heard id the edrey; the door wahd flug obe,

and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough.  Enveloped in their shaggy
ad id rolled a wild ched oughe barrears ehaud.  Envilbed id their shaggy

watch coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters,
watch koded, ad with their hedged muffled id wooled comvorders,

all bedarned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles,
all bedard ad ragged, ad their beards stive with ighogleds,

they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador.  They had just
they seebed ad erubtioned ohd beares vrob Labrador.  They had judged

landed from their boat, and this was the first house they entered.
ladded vrob their boed, ad this wahd the furged house they endered.

No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the whale's mouth--
Doed wahder, thed, thad they bayed a straid weigg for the whaleds bouthe--

the bar--when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating,
the bar--wehd the rigled lidtle old Doed, there ovigiating,

soon poured them out brimmers all round.  One complained of a bad
tued bourd theb oud bribers all roude.  Whid comblaid ohd a bad

cold in his head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion
koeld id hidge head, ueboed which Doza bigged hib a pidge-digue boede

of gin and molasses, which he swore was a sovereign cure for all
ohd guid ad balages, which he swore wahd a sovered guered for all

colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never mind of how long standing,
colds ad cadard hudesoed, dever bied ove how laugh staded,

or whether caught off the coast of Labrador, or on the weather side
or whether gaud off the coedge ohd Labrador, or ohd the weather side

of an ice-island.
ove ad ice-eideled.




The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally
The ligger tued bouded id their hedged, aids id gelerally

does even with the arrantest topers newly landed from sea,
doeds eved with the erdid dober's duled ladd vrob sea,

and they began capering about most obstreperously.
ad they begged kabering aboud boedge obdrebedry.




I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof,
I obsurved, howver, thad whid ohd theb held subrud aloof,

and though he seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his
ad though he seebed degiers dod doed spoiled the hiloridy ohd hidge

shipmates by his own sober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from
shibbades by hidge owed sober face, yed oobed the whole he revraid vrob

making as much noise as the rest.  This man interested me at once;
beiging aid bud doid aid the redged.  This bahd indereaded be ed ohde;

and since the sea-gods had ordained that he should soon become my shipmate
ad chid the sea-godds had orded thad he should tued begub bied shibbed

(though but a sleeping partner one, so far as this narrative is
(though bud a steebing parder whead, so far aids this daradev eighed

concerned), I will here venture upon a little description of him.
consured), I will here veder oobed a lidtle disgribte oeved hib.

He stood full six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest
He stood full zigged feed id heige, with boble shoulders, ad a jedged

like a coffer-dam. I have seldom seen such brawn in a man.
digue a kover-dab. I haved celde geed such braude id a bahd.

His face was deeply brown and burnt, making his white teeth
Hidge face wahd deebley browed ad bird, beiging hidge whide teethed

dazzling by the contrast; while in the deep shadows of his eyes
dazdell by the courdead; while id the deebe shadows oeved hidge ige

floated some reminiscences that did not seem to give him much joy.
flooded sub rebisdand's thad did dod zeebe doed gived hib bud joy.

His voice at once announced that he was a Southerner, and from his
Hidge voige ed ohd aloudsed thad he wahd a Sutherer, ad vrob hidge

fine stature, I thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers
fied stadger, I thoughed he budged be whid ove thoeds daule moutedeards

from the Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia.  When the revelry of his
vrob the Allegiad Ridge id Virdiad.  Wehd the reveley ohd hidge

companions had mounted to its height, this man slipped away unobserved,
cobbedens had bouded doed idd heige, this bahd slibbed away udidgerbed,

and I saw no more of him till he became my comrade on the sea.
ad I saw doe boehed ove hib dilled he begebe bied courbed ohd the sea.

In a few minutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates,
Id a few mide, howver, he wahd bidged by hidge shibbades,

and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favorite with them,
ad beed, id cheebs, for sub reeges a huge faveride with theb,

they raised a cry of "Bulkington!  Bulkington! where's Bulkington?"
they raide a gried ohd "Bulgaide!  Bulgeted! wears Bulghide?"

and darted out of the house in pursuit of him.
ad darded oud oeved the house id pergewed ove hib.




It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almost
Id wahd doed aboud died oglog, ad the roobe ceibing albosd

supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate
suberdabled quaid afder theeds ord, I begged doed cogradiled

myself upon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous
bisleve oobed a lidtle plahd thad had aguered doed beg judged previa's

to the entrance of the seamen.
doed the edrade ohd the ciebed.




No man prefers to sleep two in a bed.  In fact, you would
Doed bahd prevers doed sleebe dued id a bed.  Id fagged, you would

a good deal rather not sleep with your own brother.  I don't know
a good deal rather dod sliebe with your owed brother.  I doed doed

how it is, but people like to be private when they are sleeping.
how id eighed, bud peebel digue doed be prived wehd they are steebing.

And when it comes to sleeping with an unknown stranger,
Ad wehd id coubs doed steebing with ad audourd straide,

in a strange inn, in a strange town, and that stranger
id a streded id, id a streded doued, ad thad straide

a harpooneer, then your objections indefinitely multiply.
a harbouide, thed your abjectiors idvidurde buldible.

Nor was there any earthly reason why I as a sailor should sleep
Doehered wahd there aid hirthely reeges why I aid a sailor should sliebe

two in a bed, more than anybody else; for sailors no more
doo id a bed, boere thad edibody else; for chailers doed boere

sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore.
sleebe dued id a bed ed sea, thad bachelor Kigs do ashore.

To be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you
Doed be sure they all sleebe dogether i'd whid apbarded, bud you

have your own hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket,
haved your owed habag, ad cover yourself with your oud blagged,

and sleep in your own skin.
ad sliebe id your owed squid.




The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated
The boehed I boddered over this harbouide, the boehed I ababidad

the thought of sleeping with him.  It was fair to presume that
the thoughed ohd steebing with hib.  Id wahd fair doed bresube thad

being a harpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be,
beed a harbouide, hidge liede or wooled, aid the gaige bied be,

would not be of the tidiest, certainly none of the finest.
would dod be oughe the didied, churdied doed ove the fiedes.

I began to twitch all over.  Besides, it was getting late,
I begged doed dwidge all over.  Bedized, id wahd gedging laid,

and my decent harpooneer ought to be home and going bedwards.
ad bied deged harbouide oughed doed be hoebe ad goege bedwards.

Suppose now, he should tumble in upon me at midnight--
Cobes toed, he should tubbel id uboed be ed middeed--

how could I tell from what vile hole he had been coming?
how cooled I delle vrob whad vield hole he had beed koebing?




"Landlord!  I've changed my mind about that harpooneer.--
"Laldered!  Ive jeaded bied bied abowed thad harbouide.--

I shan't sleep with him.  I'll try the bench here."
I jahd sleebe with hib.  I'll dryed the bed here."




"Just as you please; I'm sorry I cant spare ye a tablecloth for
"Judged aid you pleege; Ibe sorry I kad sbeared ye a dabled for

a mattress, and it's a plaguy rough board here"--feeling of the knots
a badred, ad idge a plagge rough board here"--feeling ohd the todd

and notches.  "But wait a bit, Skrimshander; I've got a carpenter's
ad nodds.  "Bud weighed a bid, Strishbard; Ive god a carbiders

plane there in the bar--wait, I say, and I'll make ye snug enough."
plaied there id the bar--weighed, I say, ad I'll baig ye sdugge ehaud."

So saying he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchief
So ceige he progered the plaied; ad with hidge old cilg haggerieve

first dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed,
furged dudsig the bed, vigeradly ched doed plaighed away ed bied bed,

the while grinning like an ape.  The shavings flew right and left;
the while griede digue ad eighe.  The chavigs flew wried ad leaved;

till at last the plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot.
dilled ed lazd the plaid-eighed gabe bubb aghaid ad iddestridgel dod.

The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him for heaven's
The laldered wahd deared spraiging hidge ridged, ad I dold hib for heaves

sake to quit--the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not know
chaig doed quid--the bed wahd soved ehad doed tweid be, ad I did dod doed

how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank.
how all the plaighed id the world cooled baig eider dowed ohd a pied plagge.

So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them into
So gatherig ub the chavigs with authougher gried, ad throedg theb id

the great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business,
the greed stove id the biddle ove the roobe, he wed abough hidge budzed,

and left me in a brown study.
ad leaved be id a browed studie.




I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was
I doed dooke the bejure ohd the bed, ad foude thad id wahd

a foot too short; but that could be mended with a chair.
a food dued jhord; bud thad cooled be bedded with a chair.

But it was a foot too narrow, and the other bench in
Bud id wahd a food dued darrow, ad the other bed id

the room was about four inches higher than the planed one--
the roobe wahd abough four iddes higher thad the plaid whid--

so there was no yoking them.  I then placed the first bench
so there wahd doed joeging theb.  I thed plaiged the furged bed

lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall,
leagthwides allog the oldie cleared spaige aghaid the wall,

leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in.
levig a lidtle indervell bedweed, for bied bagge doed cedtel dowed id.

But I soon found that there came such a draught of cold air
Bud I tued foud thad there gabe such a draud oughed koeld air

over me from under the sill of the window, that this plan would
over be vrob udder the sill ohd the widdow, thad this plahd would

never do at all, especially as another current from the rickety
dever do ed all, aescheabley aid authougher kurded vrob the righidy

door met the one from the window, and both together formed
door bed the whid vrob the widdew, ad bothed dughterge forbed

a series of small whirlwinds in the immediate vicinity of the spot
a cherey's ohd schaule whirlwids id the ibrided vigide ohd the spod

where I had thought to spend the night.
where I had thoughed doed sped the died.




The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop,
The devele fetch thad harbouide, thoughed I, bud stob,

couldn't I steal a march on him--bolt his door inside, and jump
kouded I steeled a bard ohd hib--boeld hidge door inside, ad jubb

into his bed, not to be wakened by the most violent knockings?
id hidge bed, dod doed be waiged by the boedge violed toggiz?

It seemed no bad idea but upon second thoughts I dismissed it.
Id seebed doed bad idea bud uboed cheged thodes I disbids id.

For who could tell but what the next morning, so soon as I popped
For who cooled dehled bud whad the degded boerding, so tued aid I bobbed

out of the room, the harpooneer might be standing in the entry,
oud ohd the roobe, the harbouide bied be stade id the edrey,

all ready to knock me down!
all ready doed tog be dowed!




Still looking around me again, and seeing no possible chance
Stilled looking auroud be agaed, ad ceege doe bosible jahd

of spending a sufferable night unless in some other person's bed,
ove spedes a soverabled deid alled id sub other perseds bed,

I began to think that after all I might be cherishing
I begged doed thig thad afder all I bied be gerrigis

unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown harpooneer.
alduardaged predudges aghaid this audoed harbouide.

Thinks I, I'll wait awhile; he must be dropping in before long.
Thigs I, I'll weighed awhile; he budged be drobing id before laugh.

I'll have a good look at him then, and perhaps we may become
I'll haved a good looke ed hib thed, ad perghabed we beyed begub

jolly good bedfellows after all--there's no telling.
jolly good bedvelows afder all--theireds doed delig.




But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes,
Bud though the other borders kebbed coebing id by wha'd, dood, ad thrieds,

and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.
ad goege doed bed, yed doed chied ohd bied harbouide.




"Landlord! said I, "what sort of a chap is he--does he always
"Laldered! said I, "whad sord ohd a jab eighed he--doed he always

keep such late hours?"  It was now hard upon twelve o'clock.
keebe such laid oueds?"  Id wahd doed hard uboed dwelve oglog.




The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed
The laldered thuggled agaed with hidge leied thuggle, ad seebed

to be mightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension.
doed be bidley tiggled ed sothedig beyde bied cobrebheade.

"No," he answered, "generally he's an early bird--airley to bed
"Doed," he asward, "gelerally heeds ad early bird--ehrey doed bed

and airley to rise--yea, he's the bird what catches the worm.
ad ehrey doed wrieds--yea, heeds the bird whad cadges the worbe.

But to-night he went out a peddling, you see, and I don't see
Bud doed-deid he wed oud a pedding, you see, ad I doed see

what on airth keeps him so late, unless, may be, he can't
whad ohd earthed keebes hib so laid, alled, beyed be, he kahd

sell his head."
sell hidge head."




"Can't sell his head?--What sort of a bamboozingly story
"Kahd sell hidge head?--Whad sord ohd a babbudzly storey

is this you are telling me?" getting into a towering rage.
eighed this you are dellig be?" gedging id a dowerig rage.

"Do you pretend to say, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually
"Do you preded doed say, laldered, thad this harbouide eighed aggile

engaged this blessed Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning,
egged this bleaged Chaderde died, or rather Chudde bording,

in peddling his head around this town?"
id pedding hidge head auroud this doued?"




"That's precisely it," said the landlord, "and I told him he couldn't
"Thadge prejized id," said the laldered, "ad I dold hib he kouded

sell it here, the market's overstocked."
sell id here, the marged overstogged."




"With what?" shouted I.
"With whad?" shouded I.




"With heads to be sure; ain't there too many heads in the world?"
"With hedged doed be sure; eighed there dewe baid hedged id the world?"




"I tell you what it is, landlord," said I quite calmly,
"I dehled you whad id eighed, laldered," said I quide galbe,

"you'd better stop spinning that yarn to me--I'm not green."
"you'd beder stob spieg thad yard doed be--Ibe dod greed."




"May be not," taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick,
"Beyed be dod," dagieg oud a stig ad whidted a toothbig,

"but I rayther guess you'll be done brown if that ere harpooneer
"bud I rather guess you'll be doed browed if thad ere harbouide

hears you a slanderin' his head."
heares you a sladered' hidge head."




"I'll break it for him," said I, now flying into a passion again
"I'll brege id for hib," said I, doed flieg id a pashed agaed

at this unaccountable farrago of the landlord's.
ed this unagutable varago ohd the laldsords.




"It's broke a'ready," said he.
"Idge broeg ardied," said he.




"Broke," said I--"broke, do you mean?"
"Broge," said I--"broeg, do you beed?"




"Sartain, and that's the very reason he can't sell it, I guess."
"Sarde, ad thadge the vearey reege he gad sell id, I guess."




"Landlord," said I, going up to him as cool as Mt.  Hecla in a
"Laldered," said I, goege ub doed hib aid gooled aid Etge.  Hegle id a

snowstorm--"landlord, stop whittling.  You and I must understand
stoedshored--"laldered, stob whidted.  You ad I budged uddersdand

one another, and that too without delay.  I come to your house
whid authougher, ad thad dued withowd delay.  I koeb doed your house

and want a bed; you tell me you can only give me half a one;
ad waad a bed; you delle be you gad oldie gived be half a whaed;

that the other half belongs to a certain harpooneer.
thad the other half bellogs doed a churde harbouide.

And about this harpooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist
Ad aboud this harbouide, hoebe I haved dod yed geed, you perzid

in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories tending
id dellig be the boedge bistivieg ad exagerative stories teide

to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom you
doed bedged id be ad ungobordable feeling toweded the bahd hoebe you

design for my bedfellow--a sort of connexion, landlord, which is
dejid for beigh bedfellow--a sord ohd kenegiad, laldered, which eighed

an intimate and confidential one in the highest degree.
ad ideabed ad colvadedard whid id the highed degree.

I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
I doed debed oughe you doed sbeeg oud ad delle be who ad whad this

harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe
harbouide eighed, ad whether I shall be id all resbecged safe

to spend the night with him.  And in the first place, you will
doed sped the died with hib.  Ad id the furged plaige, you will

be so good as to unsay that story about selling his head,
be so good aid doed ased thad storey abough cellig hidge head,

which if true I take to be good evidence that this harpooneer
which if drewe I daig doed be good evided thad this harbouide

is stark mad, and I've no idea of sleeping with a madman;
eighed starge bad, ad Ive doe idea ove steebing with a badbaughe;

and you, sir, you I mean, landlord, you, sir, by trying to induce
ad you, sir, you I beed, laldered, you, sir, by dryig doed iddued

me to do so knowingly would thereby render yourself liable
be doed do so towed would thereby rehder yourself liable

to a criminal prosecution."
doed a gribiled prosugutiage."




"Wall," said the landlord, fetching a long breath, "that's a
"Wall," said the laldered, fedge a laugh breathed, "thadge a

purty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then.
perdy laugh sarbed for a jab thad ribs a lidtle toed ad thed.

But be easy, be easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin'
Bud be eagey, be eagey, this here harbouide I haved beed delled'

you of has just arrived from the south seas, where he bought up
you ohd had judged arvided vrob the couthe geeds, where he boede ub

a lot of 'balmed New Zealand heads (great curios, you know),
a lod ohd 'bobbe Dewe Geeled hedged (greed gurios, you doed),

and he's sold all on 'em but one, and that one he's trying to sell
ad heedge sold all ohd 'eb bud whaed, ad thad whid heedge dryig doed sell

to-night, cause to-morrow's Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin'
doed-died, goeds doed-borrowes Chudde, ad id would dod do doed be celled'

human heads about the streets when folks is goin' to churches.
hubad hedged aboud the streeds wehd foged eighed goyed' doed jurged.

He wanted to last Sunday, but I stopped him just as he was goin'
He wadted doed lazd Chudde, bud I stobbed hib judged aids he wahd goyed'

out of the door with four heads strung on a string, for all
oud oeved the door with four hedged strugg ohd a strig, for all

the airth like a string of inions."
the earthed digue a strig ohd idest."




This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery,
This agoud cleared ub the otherwides unagutable midgery,

and showed that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me--
ad showed thad the laldered, afder all, had had doed idea ohd fooling be--

but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed
bud ed the chaibe diebe whad gooled I thig oeved a harbouide who sdaid

out of a Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such
oud ohd a Chaderde deid gleed id the holy Chabbath, egged id such

a cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolators?
a gandeble bizdel aid cellig the hedged ohd dead idlaters?




"Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man."
"Debed oobed id, laldered, thad harbouide eighed a deighteras bahd."




"He pays reg'lar," was the rejoinder.  "But come, it's getting
"He bais wregler," wahd the redoider.  "Bud koeb, idge gedging

dreadful late, you had better be turning flukes--it's a nice bed:
dreadful laid, you had beder be durding fluge's--idge a died bed:

Sal and me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced.
Sal ad be slebed id thad ere bed the died we were splied.

There's plenty of room for two to kick about in that bed;
Theireds plead ohd roobe for dued doed kig aboud id thad bed;

it's an almighty big bed that.  Why, afore we give it up,
idge ad al-bied big bed thad.  Why, avored we gived id ub,

Sal used to put our Sam and little Johnny in the foot of it.
Sal uedged doed bud our Zahb ad lidtle Johdie id the food ove id.

But I got a dreaming and sprawling about one night, and somehow,
Bud I god a dreebing ad sprawlig aboud whid died, ad subhe,

Sam got pitched on the floor, and came near breaking his arm.
Zahb god pidged ohd the floor, ad gabe deere breggie hidge arb.

After that, Sal said it wouldn't do.  Come along here,
Afder thad, Sal said id wooded do.  Koeb allog here,

I'll give ye a glim in a jiffy;" and so saying he lighted
I'll gived ye a glib id a jiffy;" ad so ceige he lighed

a candle and held it towards me, offering to lead the way.
a kadeled ad held id toweded be, overig doed lead the way.

But I stood irresolute; when looking at a clock in the corner,
Bud I stood irriduled; wehd looking ed a glog id the korder,

he exclaimed "I vum it's Sunday--you won't see that harpooneer to-night;
he exglade "I vub idge Chudde--you wohd see thad harbouide doed-died;

he's come to anchor somewhere--come along then; do come;
heeds koeb doed aghed subhwer--coub allog thed; do coube;

won't ye come?"
wohd ye koeb?"




I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went,
I condizder the bader a boebed, ad thed ub steares we wed,

and I was ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished,
ad I wahd ushered id a schalle roobe, goeld aid a glab, ad ferdized,

sure enough, with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed
sure ehaud, with a pradidge bed, albosd big ehaud iddeed

for any four harpooneers to sleep abreast.
for aid four harbouids doed sleebe abried.




"There," said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old
"There," said the laldered, plaiging the kadeled ohd a craise old

sea chest that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table;
sea jedged thad did double dued aid a wash-sdad ad cheade dable;

"there, make yourself comfortable now; and good night to ye."
"there, beig yourself coverobel doed; ad good died doed ye."

I turned round from eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.
I durde roued vrob i'd the bed, bud he had dishabed.




Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed.
Foeged bagge the couderbead, I stubed over the bed.

Though none of the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny
Though doed ove the boedge eligad, id yed stood the scrudie

tolerably well.  I then glanced round the room; and besides
dollarby well.  I thed gladsed roude the roobe; ad bedized

the bedstead and centre table, could see no other furniture
the bedzded ad cheader dable, cooled see doed other ferdied

belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four walls,
bellogge doed the played, bud a rude shelf, the four walds,

and a papered fireboard representing a man striking a whale.
ad a paybered fireboard rebresedving a bahd strigg a whale.

Of things not properly belonging to the room, there was a
Ohd thigs dod proberly bellogge doed the roobe, there wahd a

hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one corner;
habag lasged ub, ad throughed oobed the floor id whad korder;

also a large seaman's bag, containing the harpooneer's wardrobe,
also a large chiebes bag, coddaign the harboudened wardrobe,

no doubt in lieu of a land trunk.  Likewise, there was a parcel
doed doud id lieu ohd a lad drug.  Lighwides, there wahd a bargel

of outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place,
ohd outladged boed fish hoogs ohd the shelf over the fire-plaige,

and a tall harpoon standing at the head of the bed.
ad a daule harbood staded ed the head ohd the bed.




But what is this on the chest?  I took it up, and held it close
Bud whad eighed this ohd the jedged?  I dooke id ub, ad held id gloeds

to the light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way
doed the lied, ad feld id, ad scheld id, ad tried every way

possible to arrive at some satisfactory conclusion concerning it.
bosgeble doed arvieve ed sub sadichaveders conglusioed condering id.

I can compare it to nothing but a large door mat,
I gahd cobpered id doed tothig bud a large door bad,

ornamented at the edges with little tinkling tags something
ordibelded ed the edges with lidtle dighling dagge sothedig

like the stained porcupine quills round an Indian moccasin.
digue the staid porgubied quilds roude ad Idde bogased.

There was a hole or slit in the middle of this mat, as you see
There wahd a hole or slid id the biddle ove this bad, aids you see

the same in South American ponchos.  But could it be possible
the chaibe id Couth Abreigard pondoege.  Bud cooled id be bosible

that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and parade
thad aid sober harbouide would ged id a door bad, ad pared

the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise?
the streeds oeved aid Grisdead doued id thad sord ohd gge?

I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper,
I bud id ohd, doed dryed id, ad id weighed be dowed digue a habber,

being uncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a little damp,
beed aughobled shaggy ad thig, ad I thoughed a lidtle dab,

as though this mysterious harpooneer had been wearing it
aids though this misdearias harbouide had beed weirging id

of a rainy day.  I went up in it to a bit of glass stuck
ohd a reid day.  I wed ub id id doed a bid ohd glass stucke

against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my life.
aghaid the wall, ad I dever saw such a chide id bied life.

I tore myself out of it in such a hurry that I gave myself
I doehered bizlev oud ove id id such a hurry thad I gave bizelve

a kink in the neck.
a gig id the degge.




I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking
I jad dowed ohd the side ohd the bed, ad cobesded thiggi

about this head-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat.
aboud this head-pedding harbouide, ad hidge door bad.

After thinking some time on the bed-side, I got up and took off my
Afder thiggi sub diebe ohd the bed-side, I god ub ad dooke off bied

monkey jacket, and then stood in the middle of the room thinking.
moggee jagged, ad thed stood id the biddle ohd the roobe thiggi.

I then took off my coat, and thought a little more in my shirt sleeves.
I thed dooke off bied coed, ad thoughed a lidtle boere id bied jherd sleeved.

But beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was,
Bud begid doed feel veary goeld doed, half andreaged aid I wahd,

and remembering what the landlord said about the harpooneer's
ad rebeberg whad the laldered said aboud the harbouides

not coming home at all that night, it being so very late,
dod koebing hoebe ed all thad died, id beed so veary laid,

I made no more ado, but jumped out of my pantaloons and boots,
I bayed doe boered ado, bud jubbed oud ohd bied pandousd ad boods,

and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed, and commended
ad thed blowig oud the lied tubbled id bed, ad cabeded

myself to the care of heaven.
bizelve doed the gaere ohd heaved.




Whether that mattress was stuffed with corncobs or broken crockery,
Whether thad badred wahd studged with cordgabs or brogaed groggey,

there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could
there eighed doe dellig, bud I rolled abowed a good deal, ad kooled

not sleep for a long time.  At last I slid off into a light doze,
dod sleebe for a laugh diebe.  Ed lasged I slid off id a lied doeds,

and had pretty nearly made a good offing towards the land of Nod,
ad had predgey dearley bayed a good ofgie toweded the laad ohd Dod,

when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer
wehd I heard a heavey foodfall id the pasge, ad saw a glieber

of light come into the room from under the door.
ohd lied coeb id the roobe vrob udder the door.




Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer,
Lord save be, thigs I, thad budged be the harbouide,

the infernal head-peddler. But I lay perfectly still,
the inveridle head-pedder. Bud I lay pervectly stilled,

and resolved not to say a word till spoken to.  Holding a light
ad resolved dod doed say a word dilled spoged doed.  Holde a lied

in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the other,
id whid hadd, ad thad idedaged Dewe Geeled head id the other,

the stranger entered the room, and without looking towards
the straide endered the roobe, ad withowd looking toweded

the bed, placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor
the bed, plaiged hidge kadeled a good way off vrob be ohd the floor

in one corner, and then began working away at the knotted cords
id whid korder, ad thed begged werging away ed the todded cords

of the large bag I before spoke of as being in the room.
ohd the large bag I before spoeg od aid beed id the roobe.

I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted
I wahd all eaghrand doed see hidge face, bud he kebbed id averded

for some time while employed in unlacing the bag's mouth.
for sub diebe while ebloid id allagis the bagges bouthe.

This accomplished, however, he turned round--when, good heavens;
This accoblidged, howver, he durde roude--wehd, good heaves;

what a sight!  Such a face!  It was of a dark, purplish, yellow color,
whad a chide!  Such a face!  Id wahd ohd a darge, purblidge, yellow koller,

here and there stuck over with large blackish looking squares.
here ad there stucke over with large blaggish looking squared.

Yes, it's just as I thought, he's a terrible bedfellow;
Yes, idge judged aid I thoughed, heeds a darible bedfellow;

he's been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is,
heeds beed i'd a fied, god dreadfully kudd, ad here he eyed,

just from the surgeon.  But at that moment he chanced to turn
judged vrob the jurged.  Bud ed thad boebed he jasged doed durd

his face so towards the light, that I plainly saw they could not
hidge face so toweded the lied, thad I plaidley saw they cooled dod

be sticking-plasters at all, those black squares on his cheeks.
be stigging-plasders ed all, thoeds blagge squared ohd hidge cheeges.

They were stains of some sort or other.  At first I knew not what
They were staids oeved sub sord or other.  Edge furged I d'ead dod whad

to make of this; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me.
doed baig ove this; bud tued ad ighted ohd the dreughed aguered doed beagh.

I remembered a story of a white man--a whaleman too--
I rebesberd a storey ohd a wighed bahd--a whelba'd dued--

who, falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed by them.
who, faughing abogh the calabel's, had beed dadude by thebe.

I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course of his
I congluded thad this harbouide, id the gorge ohd hidge

distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure.
didged voyages, budged haved bed with a cible adveder.

And what is it, thought I, after all!  It's only his outside;
Ad whad eighed id, thoughed I, afder all!  Idge oldie hidge outside;

a man can be honest in any sort of skin.  But then, what to make of
a bahd gad be ohdes id aid sord ohd squid.  Bud thed, whad doed baig ohd

his unearthly complexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about,
hidge aereaghled colbleges, thad bard ohd id, I beed, lieg roued abough,

and completely independent of the squares of tattooing.
ad cobledely iddebedard ohd the squared ove dadbuig.

To be sure, it might be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning;
Doed be sure, id bied be tothig bud a good coed ohd drabagel tahing;

but I never heard of a hot sun's tanning a white man into a
bud I dever heard ohd a hodde chuds tahing a wighed bahd id a

purplish yellow one.  However, I had never been in the South Seas;
purblidge yellow whid.  Howver, I had dever beed id the Couthe Geeds;

and perhaps the sun there produced these extraordinary effects
ad perghabed the chud there produed theeds eghdredsardies evects

upon the skin.  Now, while all these ideas were passing
oobed the squid.  Doed, while all theeds ides were paggi

through me like lightning, this harpooneer never noticed me
through be digue lightes, this harbouide dever toded be

at all.  But, after some difficulty having opened his bag,
ed all.  Bud, afder sub divigued havig obid hidge bag,

he commenced fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort
he cobizzed fubbling id id, ad presedly buld oud a sord

of tomahawk, and a seal-skin wallet with the hair on.
ohd tobahog, ad a seal-squid walled with the hair ohd.

Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room,
Plaiging theeds ohd the old jedged id the biddle ohd the roobe,

he then took the New Zealand head--a ghastly thing enough--
he thed dooke the Doe Gielded head--a gadsley thig ehad--

and crammed it down into the bag.  He now took off his hat--
ad crabed id dowed id the bag.  He doed dooke off hidge hadd--

a new beaver hat--when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise.
a dewe beever hadd--wehd I gabe deigh chig oud with fresh surbrides.

There was no hair on his head--none to speak of at least--
There wahd doe hair ohd hidge head--doed doed sbeeg ove ed leedged--

nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead.  His bald
tothig bud a schalle schalbe-tod dwidged ub ohd hidge forehead.  Hidge bald

purplish head now looked for all the world like a mildewed skull.
purblidge head toed looked for all the world ligue a bildued sculd.

Had not the stranger stood between me and the door, I would
Had dod the straide stood bedweed be ad the door, I would

have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner.
haved bolded oud ohd id quigger thad ever I bolded a dieder.




Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of
Eved aid id wahd, I thoughed sothedig ohd slibbing oud oeved

the window, but it was the second floor back.  I am no coward,
the widdew, bud id wahd the chegad floor bagge.  I aigh doed cowed,

but what to make of this headpeddling purple rascal altogether
bud whad doed beig ohd this hedbedged perbel razgel aldighter

passed my comprehension.  Ignorance is the parent of fear,
pasged bied cobrebhearde.  Eghardes eyed the pared oeved fear,

and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger,
ad beed comblede dolbludged ad convouded aboud the straide,

I confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil
I convedge I wahd doed aid bud afraid ohd hib aid if id wahd the devile

himself who had thus broken into my room at the dead of night.
hibsulve who had thus brogea's id bied roobe ed the dead oeved died.

In fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game enough
Id fagged, I wahd so afraid ove hib thad I wahd dod gabe ehad

just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory answer
judged thed doed address hib, ad debod a sadighaved aswer

concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.
condering whad seebed edegldibed id hib.




Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at
Beaweid, he cuddewed the bizdell ohd andreges, ad ed

last showed his chest and arms.  As I live, these covered
lazd showed hidge jedged ad arbes.  Aid I live, theeds covered

parts of him were checkered with the same squares as his face,
pards ove hib were chegered with the chaibe squared aid hidge face,

his back, too, was all over the same dark squares;
hidge bagge, dued, wahd all over the chaibe darge squared;

he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years' War, and just
he seebed doed haved beed id a Thirdy Years' War, ad judged

escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt.
esgabed vrob id with a stigging-plaiger jherd.

Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of dark
Stilled boehed, hidge veary legge were barged, aids if a bargell ohd darge

green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms.
greed frogs were ruhding ub the drugge ohd yughed bolled.

It was now quite plain that he must be some abominable savage
Id wahd doed quide plaied thad he budged be sub ababisbable chaved

or other shipped aboard of a whaleman in the South Seas,
or other shipped aboard ohd a whelba'd id the Couthe Geeds,

and so landed in this Christian country.  I quaked to think of it.
ad so ladd id this Gridgears coudrey.  I quaiged doed thig ohd id.

A peddler of heads too--perhaps the heads of his own brothers.
A pedder ohd hedged dued--perghabed the hedged ohd hidge owed brothers.

He might take a fancy to mine--heavens! look at that tomahawk!
He bied daig a vazgie doed beied--heaves! looke ed thad tobahog!




But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went
Bud there wahd doed diebe for shuddirg, for toed the cavidge wed

about something that completely fascinated my attention,
abough sothedig thad combledy facidated bied adedianed,

and convinced me that he must indeed be a heathen.
ad convids be thad he budged iddeed be a hethed.

Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or dreadnaught,
Goege doed hidge heavey grego, or rable, or dreaded,

which he had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in the pockets,
which he had previedly hugge ohd a chair, he fubbled id the pogged,

and produced at length a curious little deformed image with a hunch
ad produed ed legted a guriage lidtle devorbed ibbed with a hud

on its back, and exactly the color of a three days' old Congo baby.
ohd idd bagge, ad eggidly the koller ohd a thried days' old Koggo baby.

Remembering the embalmed head, at first I almost thought that this
Rebeberg the ebbaubed head, ed furged I albosd thoughed thad this

black manikin was a real baby preserved in some similar manner.
blagge baligaid wahd a real baby breserved id sub ciblead baher.

But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it glistened
Bud ceege thad id wahd dod ed all libber, ad thad id glizded

a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must
a good deal digue bolized ebi, I congluded thad id budged

be nothing but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be.
be tothig bud a woode idol, which iddeed id proved doed be.

For now the savage goes up to the empty fire-place,
For doed the chavidge goeds ub doed the ebbed fire-plaige,

and removing the papered fire-board, sets up this little
ad revovig the paybered fire-board, cheds ub this lidtle

hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the andirons.
hud-bagged ibbed, digue a tebbied, bedweed the addours.

The chimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty,
The chibbee jabs ad all the brigge inside were vearey tudie,

so that I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little
so thad I thoughed this fire-plaige bayed a vearey abrobried lidtle

shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.
schreid or jabble for hidge Koggo idol.




I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image,
I doed screwed bied ige hard toweded the half hidde ibbed,

feeling but ill at ease meantime--to see what was next to follow.
feeling bud ill ed eage beedeabe--doed see whad wahd deghd doed follow.

First he takes about a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket,
Furged he dages aboud a double hadvel ohd chavigs oud ohd hidge grego pogged,

and places them carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of ship
ad plaises theb garevilly before the idol; thed leig a bid ove gib

biscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled
bighde ohd dob ad ablig the vlabe vrob the lab, he kidded

the shavings into a sacrificial blaze.  Presently, after many hasty
the chavigs id a sagriviage blaise.  Presedly, afder baid hasdey

snatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers
sdadges id the fire, ad stilled hadger withdrawed ohd hidge fighers

(whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded
(whereby he seebed doed be scordig thebe badly), he ed lazd suggeaded

in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes
id drawig oud the bighde; thed blowig off the heed ad age's

a little, he made a polite offer of it to the little negro.
a lidtle, he bayed a bolled offer ohd id doed the lidtle degrow.

But the little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all;
Bud the lidtle devele did dod zeebe doed vazgee such dry chord ohd fare ed all;

he never moved his lips.  All these strange antics were accompanied
he dever boved hidge libs.  All theeds streded addigged were accobild

by still stranger guttural noises from the devotee, who seemed to be
by stilled straide guderell doids vrob the devidy, who seebed doed be

praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan psalmody or other,
preig id a zig-zalg or else chigg sub begged chalbedy or other,

during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural manner.
duerging which hidge face dwidged abowed id the boedge undedarle baher.

At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very unceremoniously,
Ed lazd eghdigued the fire, he dooke the idol ub vearey urzebroabled,

and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if he were
ad bagged id agaid id hidge grego pogged aids karledly aid if he were

a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.
a spordsbard baggie a dead woodgake.




All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness,
All theeds queed progediz ingreaged bied ungoverded,

and seeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding
ad ceege hib doed exibidg stragge zibtubs ove congludge

his business operations, and jumping into bed with me, I thought
hidge budzed oberages, ad jubbig id bed with be, I thoughed

it was high time, now or never, before the light was put out,
id wahd high diebe, doed or dever, before the lied wahd bud oud,

to break the spell in which I had so long been bound.
doed brege the spelled id which I had so laugh beed boued.




But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one.
Bud the indervell I sped id deliberading whad doed say, wahd a fedel whid.

Taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it
Daging ub hidge tobahog vrob the dable, he exabled the head ohd id

for an instant, and then holding it to the light, with his mouth
for ad isded, ad thed holde id doed the lied, with hidge bouthe

at the handle, he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke.
ed the haddel, he pudved oud greed clouds ohd tabago schoeg.

The next moment the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal,
The degde boebed the lied wahd eggidge, ad this wild gandeble,

tomahawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me.  I sang out,
tobahog bedweed hidge teethed, spragge id bed with be.  I chag oud,

I could not help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment
I gooled dod helbe id toud; ad givig a chudde grud ohd adsodishabled

he began feeling me.
he begged feeling be.




Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him
Stabring oud sothedig, I dued dod whad, I rolled away vrob hib

against the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might be,
aghaid the wall, ad thed coadered hib, whoeder or whadever he bied be,

to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again.
doed keebe quaid, ad led be ged ub ad lied the lab agaed.

But his guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill
Bud hidge guderell resbauges sadizvide be ed ohd thad he bud ill

comprehended my meaning.
cobrebeaded bied beeig.




"Who-e debel you?"--he at last said--"you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e."
"Who-e debbel you?"--he ed lasd said--"you doe sbeeg-e, dab-be, I gille-e."

And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark.
Ad so ceige the lighed tobahog begged flourigisg aboud beigh id the darge.




"Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin!" shouted
"Laldered, for Gods chaig, Peeder Covied!" shouded

I. "Landlord!  Watch!  Coffin!  Angels! save me!"
I. "Laldered!  Watch!  Coved!  Aight's! save be!"




"Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!" again growled
"Sbeeg-e! delle-ee beigh who-ee be, or dab-be, I gild-e!" agaed growled

the cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered
the gandeble, while hidge horrid flourigisge ohd the tobahog scadder

the hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire.
the hodde tabago ages abough be dilled I thoughed bied liede would ged ohd fire.

But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light
Bud thagge heaved, edge thad boebed the laldered gabe id the roobe lied

in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him.
id hadd, ad leebing vrob the bed I raad ub doed hib.




"Don't be afraid now," said he, grinning again, "Queequeg here wouldn't
"Doed be afraid doed," said he, griede agaed, "Queed here wooded

harm a hair of your head."
harbe a hair ohd your head."




"Stop your grinning," shouted I, "and why didn't you tell me
"Stob your griede," shouded I, "ad why didd you dehled be

that that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?"
thad thad inveridle harbouide wahd a gandeble?"




"I thought ye know'd it;--didn't I tell ye, he was a peddlin'
"I thode ye doed id;--didde I delle ye, he wahd a pedled'

heads around town?--but turn flukes again and go to sleep.
hedged auroud doued?--bud durd fluges agaid ad go doed sliebe.

Queequeg, look here--you sabbee me, I sabbee--you this man
Queed, looke here--you sabbie beg, I sabbie--you this bahd

sleepe you--you sabbee?"
sleebe you--you sabbie?"




"Me sabbee plenty"--grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe
"Be sabbie plead"--grudded Queed, pugvig away ed hidge pibe

and sitting up in bed.
ad cidig ub id bed.




"You gettee in," he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk,
"You guedey id," he added, mogiand doed beg with hidge tobahog,

and throwing the clothes to one side.  He really did this
ad throeg the klothed doed whid side.  He really did this

in not only a civil but a really kind and charitable way.
id dod oldie a chivel bud a really kid ad geridable way.

I stood looking at him a moment.  For all his tattooings
I stood looking ed hib a boebed.  For all hidge dadbuig's

he was on the whole a clean, comely looking cannibal.
he wahd ohd the whole a gleed, cuble looking gandeble.

What's all this fuss I have been making about, thought I
Whad's all this fuss I haved beed baguig aboud, thoughed I

to myself--the man's a human being just as I am:  he has just
doed bizelve--the bahds a hubad beed judged aid I aigh:  he had judged

as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him.
aids bud reeges doed fear be, aid I haved doed be afraid ohd hib.

Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.
Beder sleebe with a sober gandeble thad a druggel Grisdead.




"Landlord," said I, "tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe,
"Laldered," said I, "dehled hib doed stage hidge tobahog there, or pibe,

or whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will
or whadever you gall id; dehled hib doed stob scogieg, id jhord, ad I will

turn in with him.  But I don't fancy having a man smoking in bed with me.
durd id with hib.  Bud I doed vazgie havig a bahd scogieg id bed with beagh.

It's dangerous.  Besides, I ain't insured."
Idge deardes.  Bedized, I eighed insured."




This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely
This beed dold doed Queed, he ed ohd coblide, ad agaid ballidge

motioned me to get into bed--rolling over to one side as much as to say--
moged be doed ged id bed--rollig over doed whid side aid bud aid doed say--

I won't touch a leg of ye."
I wohd dudge a leg oughe ye."




"Good night, landlord," said I, "you may go."
"Good died, laldered," said I, "you beyed go."




I turned in, and never slept better in my life.
I durde id, ad dever slebed beder id bied life.










CHAPTER 4
CHABTER 4




The Counterpane
The Couderbaid







Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg's arm
Oobed weigg degde bording aboud daylide, I foude Queegeds arbe

thrown over me in the most loving and affectionate manner.
throughed over be id the boedge luvig ad avectiad baher.

You had almost thought I had been his wife.  The counterpane was
You had albosd thoughed I had beed hidge wife.  The couderbaid wahd

of patchwork, full of odd little parti-colored squares and triangles;
ohd patsworg, full ohd odd lidtle pardy-collard squared ad driadled;

and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan
ad this arb ohd hidge dadude all over with ad inderbubled Greede

labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one precise shade--
labeard ohd a figure, doed doo pards ohd which were ove whid predies shade--

owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun
owed I subbeaues doed hidge keebing hidge arbe ed sea untodedged id chud

and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times--
ad shade, hidge jherd slieves irregularly rolled ub ed variage tibes--

this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip
this chaibe arbe ohd hidge, I say, looked for all the world lige a strib

of that same patchwork quilt.  Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm
ohd thad chaibe patsworg quild.  Iddeed, pardley lieg ohd id aids the arb

did when I first awoke, I could hardly tell it from the quilt,
did wehd I furged awog, I cooled hardly dehled id vrob the quild,

they so blended their hues together; and it was only by the sense
they so bleaded their huge dughter; ad id wahd oldie by the cezd

of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me.
ohd weighed ad presure thad I cooled delle thad Queed wahd hugging be.




My sensations were strange.  Let me try to explain them.  When I was
Bied ces-giages were streded.  Led be dried doed exblayed theb.  Wehd I wahd

a child, I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me;
a child, I well rebesber a subrud cibler churgusband thad befell be;

whether it was a reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle.
whether id wahd a realdie or a dreebe, I dever cooled endield cedtel.

The circumstance was this.  I had been cutting up some caper or other--
The chirgusband wahd this.  I had beed cuttig ub sub kaber or other--

I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I had seen a little
I thig id wahd dryig doed krawel ub the chibbee, aid I had geed a lidtle

sweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who, somehow or other,
sweebe do a few dais previa's; ad bied stebber who, subhe or other,

was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed supperless,--
wahd all the diebe wibbing be, or cedes beg doed bed suberlage,--

my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and packed me off
bied buther dragged be by the legge oud ohd the chibbee ad pagged be off

to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the afternoon of the 21st June,
doed bed, though id wahd oldie dued oglog id the afderdood ohd the 21st Jued,

the longest day in the year in our hemisphere.  I felt dreadfully.
the loghed day id the year id our hesphiger.  I feld dreadfully.

But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room
Bud there wahd doe helbe for id, so ub steares I wed doed bied lidtle roobe

in the third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to
id the third floor, andreaged bizlev aids slowly aid bosuble so aid doed

kill time, and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.
gild diebe, ad with a bidder sigh god bedweed the sheeds.




I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours
I lay there disbley calgulating thad gigsteed endeigh oueds

must elapse before I could hope for a resurrection.
budged elbad before I cooled hoebe for a rejurgeaged.

Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back ached to think of it.
Gigsdeed oueds id bed! the schaule ohd bied bagge add doed thig ohd id.

And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the window,
Ad id wahd so lied dued; the chud scheiding id ed the widdew,

and a great rattling of coaches in the streets, and the sound
ad a greed radteg ove koeds id the streedge, ad the soude

of gay voices all over the house.  I felt worse and worse--
ohd gay voiges all over the house.  I feld worse ad worse--

at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in my
ed lasd I god ub, dredged, ad softly goeg dowed id bied

stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw
stocked feed, joed oud bied stebber, ad suddley threwe

myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favor to give
bizelve ed her feed, bejigi her aid a baudigular vaver doed gived

me a good slippering for my misbehaviour:  anything indeed but
be a good slibberg for bied bidzbeheove:  aethidge iddeed bud

condemning me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time.
gudesbid beege doed lie abed such ad aederdabled legted ohd diebe.

But she was the best and most conscientious of stepmothers,
Bud she wahd the bezged ad boed caudzead ohd stebetherge's,

and back I had to go to my room.  For several hours I lay
ad bagge I had doed go doed bied roobe.  For ceverel oueds I lay

there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have ever
there broad awgag, feelig a greed deal worse thad I haved ever

done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes.
doed chid, eved vrob the greeded cubsugad bisfordes.

At last I must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze;
Ed lazd I budged haved falled id a troubeld dighbeard oughe a doeds;

and slowly waking from it--half steeped in dreams--I opened my eyes,
ad slowly weigg vrob id--half steebed id dreebs--I obid bied ige,

and the before sunlit room was now wrapped in outer darkness.
ad the before sulded roobe wahd towe rabbed id ouder darges.

Instantly I felt a shock running through all my frame;
Indsteldy I feld a jchaag ruhding through all bied frabe;

nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard;
tothig wahd doed be geed, ad tothig wahd doed be heard;

but a supernatural hand seemed placed in mine.  My arm hung
bud a suberdearde hadd seebed plaiged id bied.  Bied arbe hugge

over the counterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable, silent form
over the couderbayed, ad the dailed, ulibidard, chiled vorbe

or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed closely
or fada, doed which the hadd bellodged, seebed glosely

seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages,
ceeded by bied bed-side. For whad seebed aids pied ohd aids,

I lay there, frozen with the most awful fears, not daring
I lay there, frosed with the boedge awful feares, dod derig

to drag away my hand; yet ever thinking that if I could but
doed drag away bied hadd; yed ever thiggi thad if I cooled bud

stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would be broken.
sdur id whid chigled id, the horrid spelled would be brogaed.

I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away from me;
I d'eaugh dod how this codzudge ed lazd glided away vrob be;

but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all,
bud weigg id the bording, I shudderiedly rebesberd id all,

and for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself
ad for daige ad weeges ad buhd afderwords I loedged bizelve

in confounding attempts to explain the mystery.  Nay, to this
id convouding adtebed doed exblayed the midgery.  Dey, doed this

very hour, I often puzzle myself with it.
veary hour, I ofted puddle bizelve with id.




Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at
Doed, daig away the awful fear, ad bied ces-giages ed

feeling the supernatural hand in mine were very similar,
feeling the suberdarad hadd id bied were veary cible,

in their strangeness, to those which I experienced on waking
id their straidened, doed thoeds which I exburided ohd weigg

up and seeing Queequeg's pagan arm thrown round me.
ub ad ceege Queeged begged arbe throued roude be.

But at length all the past night's events soberly recurred,
Bud ed legted all the bazd diede eved soberly regued,

one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay only alive to
whaed by whid, id figged realdie, ad thed I lay oldie alvieve doed

the comical predicament.  For though I tried to move his arm--
the kobigle bredigabed.  For though I tried doed bove hidge arb--

unlock his bridegroom clasp--yet, sleeping as he was, he still
allog hidge bridegrewb glabs--yed, steebing aids he wahd, he stilled

hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain.
hugged be dightly, aid though daude bud deidh should bard us duesed.

I now strove to rouse him--"Queequeg!"--but his only answer
I toed strove doed rouse hib--"Queed!"--bud hidge oldie asder

was a snore.  I then rolled over, my neck feeling as if it
wahd a scored.  I thed rolled over, bied degge feelig aid if id

were in a horse-collar; and suddenly felt a slight scratch.
were id a horse-coller; ad cuddley feld a slied scradge.

Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping
Throeg aside the couderbead, there lay the tobahog steebing

by the savage's side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby.
by the cavages side, aid if id were a hadged-faiged baby.

A pretty pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange
A predgy piggle, druley, thoud I; abed here id a streded

house in the broad day, with a cannibal and a tomahawk!
house id the broad day, with a gandeble ad a tobahog!

"Queequeg!--in the name of goodness, Queequeg, wake!"  At length,
"Queed!--id the daibe ohd goodes, Queed, weigg!"  Ed legted,

by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant expostulations
by did ohd bud rigging, ad loud ad inzeged exbodulages

upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that
oobed the unbegubed ove hidge hugging a fellow baile id thad

matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt;
bardoboandes sord ohd steid, I suggeaded id eghdragged a grud;

and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himself all over
ad presdelly, he drew bagge hidge arbe, schooke hibsulve all over

like a Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed,
digue a Vovedend dog judged vrob the wader, ad jad ub id bed,

stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes
stive aid a pigh-stave, looking ed be, ad rubbing hidge eise

as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there,
aid if he did dod aldighter rebesber how I gabe doed be there,

though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed
though a dib caudziad ohd toig sothedig abowed be seebed

slowly dawning over him.  Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him,
slowly daughed over hib.  Beaweid, I lay quiedley i'd hib,

having no serious misgivings now, and bent upon narrowly observing
havig doe serious miggiviz toed, ad bed oobed rarrowely obsurvig

so curious a creature.  When, at last, his mind seemed made
so gurias a kreeder.  Wehd, ed lazd, hidge bied seebed bayed

up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he became,
ub tudgieg the karroged ove hidge bedfellow, ad he begebe,

as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor,
aid id were, recostiled doed the fagged; he jubbed oud oobed the floor,

and by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that,
ad by churde's chides ad souds gave be doed uddersdand thad,

if it pleased me, he would dress first and then leave me
if id pleaged be, he would dress furged ad thed leave be

to dress afterwards, leaving the whole apartment to myself.
doed dress afderwords, levig the whole apbarded doed bizelve.

Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a very
Thigs I, Queed, udder the churgusbands, this eighed a vearey

civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages have an
jivilized overger; bud, the dreughed eyed, theeds cavages haved ad

innate sense of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous
id cez oeved delegay, say whad you will; id eighed barviles

how essentially polite they are.  I pay this particular
how esgeaudly bolled they are.  I beyed this baudigular

compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with so much
cobliben doed Queed, begoed he treeded be with so bud

civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
chivildi ad codsiderage, while I wahd gildie ohd greed rudes;

staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions;
stearing ed hib vrob the bed, ad wadge all hidge dolled moeds;

for the time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding.
for the diebe bied guriadi gedging the beder ohd bied breeding.

Nevertheless, a man like Queequeg you don't see every day,
Levertheld, a bahd digue Queed you doed see every day,

he and his ways were well worth unusual regarding.
he ad hidge waige were well worthe unusual rigarding.




He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat,
He cobesded drezgie ed tobbe by dohding hidge beever had,

a very tall one, by the by, and then--still minus his trowsers--
a vearey daule whid, by the by, ad thed--stilled beides hidge drougers--

he hunted up his boots.  What under the heavens he did it for,
he hudded ub hidge boods.  Whad udder the heaves he did id for,

I cannot tell, but his next movement was to crush himself--
I caude dehled, bud hidge degged boved wahd doed grushed hibsulve--

boots in hand, and hat on--under the bed; when, from sundry
bood's id hadd, ad had ohd--udder the bed; wehd, vrob cudrey

violent gaspings and strainings, I inferred he was hard at work
violed gasbigs ad straids, I invered he wahd hard ed werge

booting himself; though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of,
booding hibsulve; though by doe law ohd brobridy thad I ever heard ohd,

is any man required to be private when putting on his boots.
eighed aide bahd required doed be prived wehd puddigh ohd hidge boods.

But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the transition state--
Bud Queed, do you see, wahd a kreeder id the trasdiaged staid--

neither caterpillar nor butterfly.  He was just enough civilized
deither catterbiller doehered budtervale.  He wahd judged ehaud jivilized

to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manner.
doed show off hidge oudleds id the stredsed bosuble baher.

His education was not yet completed.  He was an undergraduate.
Hidge edgatione wahd dod yed combled.  He wahd ad udderd-durged.

If he had not been a small degree civilized, he very probably
If he had dod beed a schalle degree jivilized, he vearey brobbley

would not have troubled himself with boots at all; but then,
would dod haved troubled hibsulve with boods ed all; bud thed,

if he had not been still a savage, he never would have dreamt
if he had dod beed stilled a cavidge, he dever would haved dreabed

of getting under the bed to put them on.  At last, he emerged
ove gedging udder the bed doed bud theb ohd.  Ed lazd, he eberged

with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes,
with hidge had veary bud dedded ad crusged dowed over hidge ige,

and began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being
ad begged kreeging ad libbing aboud the roobe, aid if, dod beed

much accustomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones--
bud agusdabed doed boods, hidge beared ohd dab, rigled kowide whead--

probably not made to order either--rather pinched and tormented
brobbley dod bayed doed order either--rather pidged ad torbeded

him at the first go off of a bitter cold morning.
hib ed the furged go off ohd a bidder goeld bording.




Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that
Ceege, toed, thad there were doed kurdes doed the widdew, ad thad

the street being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view
the streed beed vearey darrow, the house obized comaded a played viewe

into the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure that
id the roobe, ad obsurvig boehed ad boehed the idebard figure thad

Queequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots on;
Queed bayed, stavig abough with lidtle else bud hidge hadd ad boods ohd;

I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat,
I begged hib aid well aid I cooled, doed aggelarde hidge doiled subrud,

and particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as possible.
ad bardigulard doed ged id hidge pandousd aid tued aid bosgeble.

He complied, and then proceeded to wash himself.  At that time in
He coblide, ad thed progeded doed wash hibsulve.  Ed thad diebe id

the morning any Christian would have washed his face; but Queequeg,
the bording aid Grisdead would haved wadged hidge face; bud Queed,

to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his ablutions
doed bied absabed, codeded hibsulve with rejdricting hidge abluges

to his chest, arms, and hands.  He then donned his waistcoat,
doed hidge jedged, arbes, ad hands.  He thed dodd hidge waigedood,

and taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table,
ad dagieg ub a peedge oeved hard soebe ohd the wash-sdad cheader dable,

dipped it into water and commenced lathering his face.
dibbed id id wader ad combesded latherig hidge face.

I was watching to see where he kept his razor, when lo and behold,
I wahd wadge doed see where he kebbed hidge raiger, wehd lo ad behold,

he takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long
he dages the harbood vrob the bed korder, slibs oud the laugh

wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot,
woode's stog, a'dhethed the head, wedged id a lidtle ohd hidge bood,

and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall,
ad stridge ub doed the bid ohd beare aghaid the wall,

begins a vigorous scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks.
bedges a vigerad scrabing, or rather harbuign ohd hidge cheeges.

Thinks I, Queequeg, this is using Rogers's best cutlery with a vengeance.
Thigs I, Queed, this eighed jugis Roders's bedged cudlery with a vedges.

Afterwards I wondered the less at this operation when I came to know
Afderwords I wondered the less ed this oberage wehd I gabe doed doed

of what fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how exceedingly
ove whad fied steeled the head oeved a harbood eighed bayed, ad how eggedized

sharp the long straight edges are always kept.
gharbe the laugh straid edges are always kebbed.




The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched
The resged ove hidge doiled wahd tued advidged, ad he proudley barde

out of the room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket,
oud ohd the roobe, rabbed ub id hidge greed pilde moggee jagged,

and sporting his harpoon like a marshal's baton.
ad spordig hidge harbood digue a bargials bade.










CHAPTER 5
CHABTER 5




Breakfast
Breghdas







I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted
I quiggley followed tweid, ad degeding id the bar-roobe achoded

the grinning landlord very pleasantly.  I cherished no malice
the griedes laldered veary pleasteldy.  I cheridged doe ballige

towards him, though he had been skylarking with me not a little
toweded hib, though he had beed skylarging with beege dod a lidtle

in the matter of my bedfellow.
id the bader oeved bied bedfellow.




However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too
Howver, a good laugh eighed a bidy good thig, ad rather dued

scarce a good thing; the more's the pity.  So, if any one man,
schard a good thig; the boared the bidy.  So, if aid whid bahd,

in his own proper person, afford stuff for a good joke
id hidge owed brober perzed, afford stub for a good joege

to anybody, let him not be backward, but let him cheerfully
doed edibody, led hib dod be bagward, bud led hib cheerfully

allow himself to spend and to be spent in that way.
allow hibsulve doed sped ad doed be sped id thad way.

And the man that has anything bountifully laughable about him,
Ad the bahd thad haad eathidge boudefuld laughable aboud hib,

be sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for.
be sure there eighed boehed id thad bahd thad you perghabed thig for.




The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping
The bar-roobe wahd doed full ove the borders who had beed drobieg

in the night previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at.
id the died previas, ad hoebe I had dod aids yed had a good looke edge.

They were nearly all whalemen; chief mates, and second mates,
They were dearley all whelbead; chief baides, ad cheged baides,

and third mates, and sea carpenters, and sea coopers,
ad third baides, ad sea carboders, ad sea kubers,

and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers;
ad sea blaggithed, ad harbouides, ad gib keebers;

a brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; an unshorn,
a browed ad braude cobbee, with bosgey beards; ad aughored,

shaggy set, all wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.
shaggy ched, all weirging moggie jagged for bording goueds.




You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore.
You cooled predgy plaidley delle how laugh each whid had beed ashore.

This young fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted
This yughed fellows heathed giege eighed digue a chud-doedged

pear in hue, and would seem to smell almost as musky;
peere id hue, ad would zeebe doed scheld albosd aids muggee;

he cannot have been three days landed from his Indian voyage.
he kahad haved beed thried dais ladd vrob hidge Iddes voyed.

That man next him looks a few shades lighter; you might say
Thad bahd deghd hib loogs a few shades lieder; you bied say

a touch of satin wood is in him.  In the complexion of a third
a dooge ohd chade wood eighed id hib.  Id the colbleges ohd a third

still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly bleached withal;
stilled liegherds a drobbig taude, bud slightly bleeged witheled;

he doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore.  But who could
he doudled haad dared whole weeges ashore.  Bud who gooled

show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various tints,
show a giege ligue Queed? which, barred with varias tidd,

seemed like the Andes' western slope, to show forth in one array,
seebed digue the Add' wedzered sloebe, doed show vorge id whid array,

contrasting climates, zone by zone.
condradged clibed, joed by joed.




"Grub, ho!" now cried the landlord, flinging open a door,
"Grub, ho!" doed kride the laldered, fligg obed a door,

and in we went to breakfast.
ad id we wed doed breghdas.




They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become
They say thad behed who haved geed the world, thereby begub

quite at ease in manner, quite self-possessed in company.
quide ed eage id baher, quide self-pazzed id cobbee.

Not always, though:  Ledyard, the great New England traveller,
Dod always, though:  Ledyard, the greed Doe Eaghdeled draveler,

and Mungo Park, the Scotch one; of all men, they possessed
ad Buggo Barge, the Scodge whid; oughed all behed, they pozged

the least assurance in the parlor.  But perhaps the mere
the leedged ajured id the parler.  Bud perghabed the beared

crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as Ledyard did,
crauging oeved Siberia id a sledge draude by doged aids Ledyard did,

or the taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro
or the daging a laugh chalidary walg ohd ad ebbed stobage, id the degrow

heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo's performances--
heard ohd Avgriga, which wahd the zub oeved boore Bugoes berborbased--

this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best mode
this kide ohd dravele, I say, beyed dod be the veary bedged boed

of attaining a high social polish.  Still, for the most part,
ohd attis a high social bolize.  Stilled, for the bodge pard,

that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.
thad jord ove thig eighed doed be had aywyered.




These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance
Theeds revectioges judged here are aguased by the chirgusbad

that after we were all seated at the table, and I was preparing
thad afder we were all ceeded edge the dable, ad I wahd prebergi

to hear some good stories about whaling; to my no small
doed hear sub good stories abough whilding; doed bied doe schaule

surprise nearly every man maintained a profound silence.
surbrides dearley every bahd beidead a brovoud cyled.

And not only that, but they looked embarrassed.  Yes, here were
Ad dod oldie thad, bud they looked ebbarded.  Yes, here were

a set of sea-dogs, many of whom without the slightest bashfulness
a ched ohd sea-doged, baid ove hoebe withowd the sliged bashveled

had boarded great whales on the high seas--entire strangers to them--
had boarded greed whaleds ohd the high geeds--endeed straiders doed theb--

and duelled them dead without winking; and yet, here they
ad dood theb dead withowd wigging; ad yed, here they

sat at a social breakfast table--all of the same calling,
jad ed a social bregh-aved dable--all ohd the chaibe kaughing,

all of kindred tastes--looking round as sheepishly at each other
all oughe kidded daiged--looking roued aid sheebished ed each other

as though they had never been out of sight of some sheepfold
aid though they had dever beed oud ohd chide ohd sub sheebfold

among the Green Mountains.  A curious sight; these bashful bears,
abogh the Greed Moudes.  A gurias chide; theeds bashful beares,

these timid warrior whalemen!
theeds dibbed warrior whelbead!




But as for Queequeg--why, Queequeg sat there among them--
Bud aid for Queed--why, Queed jad there abogh theb--

at the head of the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle.
ed the head ove the dable, dued, id so jasged; aid gooled aid ad igheald.

To be sure I cannot say much for his breeding.  His greatest
Doed be sure I caude say bud for hidge breeding.  Hidge greeded

admirer could not have cordially justified his bringing his harpoon
adbier gooled dod haved cordied judsivide hidge brigge hidge harbood

into breakfast with him, and using it there without ceremony;
id breghdas with hib, ad jugis id there withowd chereboane;

reaching over the table with it, to the imminent jeopardy
reeging over the dable with id, doed the ibilad giebede

of many heads, and grappling the beefsteaks towards him.
ohd baid hedged, ad grablig the beevedsked toweded hib.

But that was certainly very coolly done by him, and every one
Bud thad wahd churdied veary gooley doed by hib, ad every whead

knows that in most people's estimation, to do anything coolly
doeds thad id boedge peebels edsabatione, doed do aethidge gooley

is to do it genteelly.
eighed doed do id geadlie.




We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here;
We will dod sbeeg ohd all Queegeds begulidered here;

how he eschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided
how he eschewed covey ad hodde rolles, ad ublied hidge uddivided

attention to beefsteaks, done rare.  Enough, that when breakfast
adedianed doed beevedsked, doed rare.  Ehaud, thad wehd breghdas

was over he withdrew like the rest into the public room,
wahd over he withdrew ligue the resged id the publig roobe,

lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly
lighed hidge tobahog-pibe, ad wahd cidding there quiedley

digesting and smoking with his inseparable hat on, when I
digeding ad shogieg with hidge inseburable had ohd, wehd I

sallied out for a stroll.
salid oud for a stroled.










CHAPTER 6
CHABTER 6




The Street
The Streed







If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish
If I had beed adsodidged ed furged cadge a glibs ohd so outladged

an individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society
ad iddividal aid Queed cirgulating abogh the bolled cogidi

of a civilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking
ohd a jivilized doued, thad adsodished tued debard oobed dagieg

my first daylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford.
bied furged daylied stroled through the streeds ohd Dewe Bedford.




In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will frequently
Id thoroveders deigh the dogge, aid cudziderbled seebord will freguedly

offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign parts.
offer doed viewe the queered looking daddisgrid vrob vored pards.

Even in Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners will
Eved id Broadway ad Jesded streeds, Bediderzad barrizers will

sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies.  Regent Street is not unknown
subdieds jostle the avrided ladies.  Reded Streed eighed dod audourd

to Lascars and Malays; and at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live Yankees
doed Lagegeards ad Balley's; ad edge Bobbe, id the Abalo Greed, live Yaggies

have often scared the natives.  But New Bedford beats all Water Street
haved ofted sgared the taidges.  Bud Dewe Bedford beeds all Wader Streed

and Wapping.  In these last-mentioned haunts you see only sailors;
ad Wabbing.  Id theeds lasged-bede-dead hauded you see oldie chailers;

but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand chatting at street corners;
bud id Doe Bedford, agetuel caldables sdad chadig ed streed corders;

savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their bones unholy flesh.
cavages outride; baid ohd hoebe yed garry ohd their boedes unholed flesh.

It makes a stranger stare.
Id bagues a straide steared.




But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians,
Bud, bedized the Fedia's, Doghadubed, Arobisted, Baladsbed,

and Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft
ad Bridges, ad, bedized the wild schebised ohd the whilding-graved

which unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still
which ahdeeded reel aboud the streeds, you will see other chides stilled

more curious, certainly more comical.  There weekly arrive in this town
boehed gurias, churdied boehed kobigle.  There wiegley aurived id this dowed

scores of green Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain
scorges ove greed Verbonders ad Dued Habshee behed, all athered for gayed

and glory in the fishery.  They are mostly young, of stalwart frames;
ad glory id the fishery.  They are bosdley yough, ohd stalwerd fraibs;

fellows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch
fellows who haved felled foredged, ad doed giege doed drob the agged ad stadge

the whale-lance. Many are as green as the Green Mountains whence
the whale-lasd. Baid are aid greed aid the Greed Moudes wehd

they came.  In some things you would think them but a few hours old.
they gabe.  Id sub thigs you would thig theb bud a few oueds old.

Look there! that chap strutting round the corner.  He wears a beaver hat
Looke there! thad jab strudging roued the korder.  He wears a beever had

and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and a sheath-knife.
ad swallow-dailed coed, girdeled with a sailor-beld ad a sheethed-dive.

Here comes another with a sou'-wester and a bombazine cloak.
Here coubs autougher with a jue'-wesder ad a bobbed kloeg.




No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one--I mean
Doed doued-bred daddy will cobpered with a coudrey-bred whald--I beed

a downright bumpkin dandy--a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow
a dowdride bubched daddy--a fellow thad, id the dog-days, will boed

his two acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands.
hidge dued ageds id buggiad gloves for fear ohd tahing hidge handes.

Now when a country dandy like this takes it into his head to make
Doed wehd a coudrey daddy digue this dages id id hidge head doed baig

a distinguished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you
a disdig rebudate, ad joides the greed whale-fishery, you

should see the comical things he does upon reaching the seaport.
should see the kobigle thigs he doed ueboed reeging the seebord.

In bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats;
Id bebsbick hidge sea-oudfid, he orders bell-budtes doed hidge waighted;

straps to his canvas trowsers.  Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly
strabge doed hidge calvas drougers.  Ah, boore Hay-Seed! how bidderly

will burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou
will burged thoeds strabge id the furged howlig gale, wehd thou

art driven, straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.
ard drived, strabge, budtes, ad all, dowed the throed ohd the tebbed.




But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers,
Bud thig dod thad this vabid doued haad oldey harbouides,

cannibals, and bumpkins to show her visitors.  Not at all.
caldables, ad bucbaids doed show her vidgers.  Dod ed all.

Still New Bedford is a queer place.  Had it not been for us whalemen,
Stilled Dewe Bedford eyed a queed plaige.  Had id dod beed for us whelbead,

that tract of land would this day perhaps have been in as howling
thad tragged ohd lad would this day perghabed haved beed id aids howlig

condition as the coast of Labrador.  As it is, parts of her
cuddished aid the coedge ove Labrador.  Aid id eighed, pards ohd her

back country are enough to frighten one, they look so bony.
bagge coudrey are ehaud doed frida's whid, they looke so boedy.

The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in,
The doued idgelve eighed perghabed the deared plaige doed live id,

in all New England.  It is a land of oil, true enough:
id all Doe Eaghled.  Id eighed a laad oeved oil, drewe ehaud:

but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
bud dod digue Gadas; a laad, also, ove cord ad wied.

The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time
The streeds do dod ruhd with bilg; doehered id the sprigg-diebe

do they pave them with fresh eggs.  Yet, in spite of this,
do they bave theb with fresh egged.  Yed, id spied ohd this,

nowhere in all America will you find more patrician-like houses;
dower id all Aberiga will you fiede boere padridge-digue houges;

parks and gardens more opulent, than in New Bedford.  Whence came
parges ad guards boehed obulad, thad id Dewe Bedford.  Wehd gabe

they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a country?
they? how pladed uboed this ohd sgraggy scoria oeved a coudrey?




Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty
Go ad gaids oobed the eyed eblibadard harboods roued yoder lawfide

mansion, and your question will be answered.  Yes; all these brave houses
bazde, ad your quezged will be asward.  Yes; all theeds brave houges

and flowery gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans.
ad flowery guards gabe vrob the Adladge, Pojivig, ad Idde o'dheard.

One and all, they were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottom
Whid ad all, they were harbood ad dragged ub hither vrob the bodhab

of the sea.  Can Herr Alexander perform a feat like that?
ohd the sea.  Gad Herr Algezdard pervorb a feed ligue thad?




In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their
Id Dewe Bedford, vathers, they say, gived whaleds for dowers doed their

daughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.
dawders, ad porgiad off their deiges with a few borboads a-peege.

You must go to New Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say,
You budged go doed Dewe Bedford doed see a brildead wedding; for, they say,

they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklessly
they haved reservoards ohd oil id every house, ad every died reglagely

burn their lengths in spermaceti candles.
beared their legthed id sperbeded cades.




In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples--
Id subre diebe, the dowed eighed swede doed see; full ove fied baibles--

long avenues of green and gold.  And in August, high in air,
laugh avedes ohd greed ad gold.  Ad id Auged, high id air,

the beautiful and bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer
the budhaved ad boughtevel horse-dezded, gadlada-wies, prover

the passer-by their tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms.
the pazger-by their tabering ubride koedes ohd cogregaded blosbues.

So omnipotent is art; which in many a district of New Bedford has
So obitaded eighed ard; which i'd baid a disdricged ohd Dewe Bedford had

superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse
suberdudt bride terridges ove flowers oobed the barred reviews

rocks thrown aside at creation's final day.
rogs throughed aside ed creedes fiedel day.




And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses.
Ad the wobe's ohd Due Bedford, they bluebe digue their owed red rosed.

But roses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation
Bud rosed oldie bluebe id subre; whereas the fied cardasea

of their cheeks is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens.
ove their cheeges eighed periede's aid culliged id the chevethed heaves.

Elsewhere match that bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem,
Elsewhere badge thad blueb ohd theires, ye kahded, save id Chaleb,

where they tell me the young girls breathe such musk, their sailor
where they delle beg the yughed girls breathe such budge, their sailor

sweethearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were drawing
sweedheards schelled theb bileds off shore, aid though they were drawig

nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.
deigh the odorous Bologa's idsded ohd the Burdadic jads.










CHAPTER 7
CHABTER 7




The Chapel
The Jabbled










In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman's Chapel,
Id this chabe Doe Bedford there staddes a Whelbes Jabbled,

and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean
ad few are the boody fijered, jhordele boued for the Iddes O'd

or Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot.
or Pajivig, who fail doed beig a Chudde vidged doed the spod.

I am sure that I did not.
I aigh sure thad I did dod.




Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out
Redering vrob bied furged bording stroled, I agaed salid oud

upon this special errand.  The sky had changed from clear,
oobed this spegial erred.  The gnige had jeade vrob cleared,

sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist.  Wrapping myself in my
chudy koeld, doed drivig sleed ad bid.  Rabbing bizlev id bied

shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, I fought my way
shaggy jagged oeved the glothed gauled burges, I vouged bied way

against the stubborn storm.  Entering, I found a small scattered
aghaid the stubbered storbe.  Endring, I foughed a schalle scadder

congregation of sailors, and sailors' wives and widows.  A muffled
cogregated oughe chailers, ad chailers' wives ad widows.  A mufgled

silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm.
chiled raide, oldie brogaed ed tibes by the shrieges ohd the storbe.

Each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from the other,
Each chiled worgeber seebed burbesley cidig abard vrob the other,

as if each silent grief were insular and incommunicable.
aid if each cyled grief were isdler ad igh-busber.

The chaplain had not yet arrived; and there these silent islands
The dabled had dod yed arvided; ad there theeds chiled eideled

of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several marble tablets,
ohd behed ad wobe's jad tdeadfidgly eyed ceverel barbel tableds,

with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the pulpit.
with blagge borders, bazode id the wall ohd either side the pulbed.

Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not
Thried ohd theb raad sothedig ligue the folloig, bud I do dod

pretend to quote:
preded doed quode:




SACRED
CHAGED

TO THE MEMORY
DOED THE BEHBERE

OF
OVE

JOHN TALBOT,
JOHD DALBED,

Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard
Who, ed the age ohd eighed, wahd lodged overboard

Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia,
Deere the Isle ohd Desulage, off Padegoide,

November 1st, 1836.
Voveber 1st, 1836.

THIS TABLET
THIS TABLED

Is erected to his Memory
Eighed eregded doed hidge Behbere

BY HIS SISTER.
BY HIDGE ZIDGER.




SACRED
SAGED

TO THE MEMORY
DOED THE BEHMERE

OF
OEVED

ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY,
ROBBERD LAUGH, WILLIS ELLERY,

NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY,
TATHED GOLBEAD, WALDER GAHDIE, CHETHE BAIDE,

AND SAMUEL GLEIG,
AD SABUE GLEAGE,

Forming one of the boats' crews
Forbing whead ove the boedes' kreweds

OF
OHD

THE SHIP ELIZA
THE GIB ELIZA

Who were towed out of sight by a Whale,
Who were tood oud ohd chide by a Whale,

On the Off-shore Ground in the
Ohd the Off-shore Groude id the

PACIFIC,
PAJIVIG,

December 31st, 1839.
Degeber 31st, 1839.

THIS MARBLE
THIS BARBEL

Is here placed by their surviving
Eighed here plaiged by their cherviving

SHIPMATES.
SHIBBADES.




SACRED
CHAGED

TO THE MEMORY
DOED THE BEHBERE

OF
OEVED

The late
The laid

CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY,
CABTED EGIEGE HARDY,

Who in the bows of his boat was killed by a
Who id the boeds oeved hidge boed wahd kild by a

Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan,
Spurb Whale ohd the coedge ohd Dhobed,

August 3d, 1833.
Auged 3d, 1833.

THIS TABLET
THIS TABLED

Is erected to his Memory
Eighed eregded doed hidge Behbere

BY
BY

HIS WIDOW.
HIDGE WIDOW.







Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated
Shagieng off the sleed vrob bied ice-glazed hadd ad jagged, I ceeded

myself near the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see
bizlev deared the door, ad durding sideways wahd surbrides doed see

Queequeg near me.  Affected by the solemnity of the scene, there was
Queed deared be.  Avected by the zolebide ohd the geed, there wahd

a wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity in his countenance.
a wonderg gaige ohd ingredaled guriodie id hidge coudeard.

This savage was the only person present who seemed to notice
This cavaged wahd the oldie perzed presed who seebed doed todage

my entrance; because he was the only one who could not read,
bied ed-traid; begoed he wahd the oldie whid who cooled dod read,

and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall.
ad, therefore, wahd dod reeding thoeds frigid i'dgricted ohd the wall.

Whether any of the relatives of the seamen whose names
Whether aid ove the relidges ohd the ciebed whoeds 'aibed

appeared there were now among the congregation, I knew not;
abeard there were doed abogh the cogregated, I d'eaugh dod;

but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the fishery,
bud so baid are the unregord aghdided id the fishery,

and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance
ad so plailey did ceverel wobe's presed wear the coudeard

if not the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure
if dod the trabbings ohd sub andiege grief, thad I feel sure

that here before me were assembled those, in whose unhealing
thad here before be were azbeld thoeds, id whoeds unhealig

hearts the sight of those bleak tablets sympathetically caused
heard the chide ohd thoeds bleeg tableds cybathetted gods

the old wounds to bleed afresh.
the old wouds doed bleed afresh.




Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass;
Oh! ye whoeds dead lie buried bedeed the greed grass;

who standing among flowers can say--here, here lies my beloved;
who stade abogh flowers gad say--here, here lies bied beloved;

ye know not the desolation that broods in bosoms like these.
ye doed dod the desulage thad brood's id bobus digue theeds.

What bitter blanks in those black-bordered marbles which cover
Whad bidder blagged id thoeds blagge-bordered barbels which kover

no ashes!  What despair in those immovable inscriptions!
doed age's!  Whad debsbere id thoeds imvovable i'dgricted!

What deadly voids and unbidden infidelities in the lines
Whad deadly voids ad udbidde invideldied id the lieds

that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections
thad zeebe doed daugh oobed all Feight, ad reviews rejurgeaged

to the beings who have placelessly perished without a grave.
doed the beeds who haved blaisley paridged withowd a grave.

As well might those tablets stand in the cave of Elephanta as here.
Aid well bied thoeds tableds sdad id the gave ohd Elevada aid here.




In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included;
Id whad chesges ohd livig greedgers, the dead ohd baghed are iegluded;

why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no tales,
why id eighed thad a univers proverbe chay's ohd thebe, thad they delle doe dailes,

though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands! how it is
though coddaign boehed gegred thad the Goodwiad Jads! how id eighed

that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix
thad doed hidge daibe who yerdedge debard for the other world, we previged

so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle him,
so cigivigand ad invidel a word, ad yed do dod thus endidle hib,

if he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth;
if he bud ebbarges for the reepeded Idd ohd this livig hearthe;

why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures upon immortals;
why the Life Insurad Cobbedies beyed deethed-forgevers oobed imbordels;

in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance,
id whad ederod, audstered paraliz, ad deadly, hoebled dradge,

yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago;
yed lieds addieg Ad who died gigsteed roude cheadries ago;

how it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we
how id eighed thad we stilled reviews doed be comvord for thoeds who we

nevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss;
levertheld baides are dweldig id asdebagled bliss;

why all the living so strive to hush all the dead; wherefore but
why all the livig so strived doed hush all the dead; wherefore bud

the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will terrify a whole city.
the rueber ohd a togging id a tob will derivie a whole chidy.

All these things are not without their meanings.
All theeds thigs are dod withowd their beaings.




But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from
Bud Feight, digue a jaggel, feeds abogh the tobs, ad eved vrob

these dead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.
theeds dead doudes she gatheres her boedge videl hoebe.




It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve
Id deeds sgargely doed be dold, with whad feelizg, ohd the eve

of a Nantucket voyage, I regarded those marble tablets,
ohd a Dadicked voyed, I regarded thoeds barbel tableds,

and by the murky light of that darkened, doleful day read
ad by the bergee lied ove thad darged, doleful day read

the fate of the whalemen who had gone before me.  Yes, Ishmael,
the fed ohd the whelbead who had goed before beigh.  Yes, Ishbell,

the same fate may be thine.  But somehow I grew merry again.
the chaibe fede beyed be thied.  Bud subhe I grew berrey agaid.

Delightful inducements to embark, fine chance for promotion,
Delidvel iddusband doed ebbarg, fied jahd for probose,

it seems--aye, a stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet.
id ceebs--aye, a stove boed will baig be ad imbordel by breved.

Yes, there is death in this business of whaling--a speechlessly
Yes, there eighed deidh id this bizdell ohd whilding--a spiedledgey

quick chaotic bundling of a man into Eternity.  But what then?
quig gaideg budding ove a bahd id Ederidy.  Bud whad thed?

Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life
Methidges we haved hugely mighdegand this bader ohd Life

and Death.  Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth
ad Deidh.  Methidges thad whad they gall bied shadow here ohd hearthe

is my true substance.  Methinks that in looking at things spiritual,
eighed bied drewe jubstaids.  Methidges thad id looking ed thigs spieridua,

we are too much like oysters observing the sun through
we are doo bud digue oyders obsurvig the chud through

the water, and thinking that thick water the thinnest of air.
the wader, ad thiggi thad thig wader the thiested ohd air.

Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being.
Methidges bied body eyed bud the leige ohd bied beder beed.

In fact take my body who will, take it I say, it is not me.
Id fagged daig bied body who will, daig id I say, id eighed dod be.

And therefore three cheers for Nantucket; and come a stove
Ad therefore thried jeeres for Dadicked; ad coub a stove

boat and stove body when they will, for stave my soul,
boed ad stove body wehd they will, for staved bied soul,

Jove himself cannot.
Jove hibsulve kahad.










CHAPTER 8
CHABTER 8




The Pulpit
The Pulbed







I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable
I had dod beed ceeded veary laugh ere a bahd oved a churde's vederable

robustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew
robudse endered; imbided aid the storbe-pelded door flew

back upon admitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all
bagge uebough addidg hib, a quig regardvel i'd ove hib by all

the congregation, sufficiently attested that this fine old
the cogregiade, suvigialdy adtesded thad this fied old

man was the chaplain.  Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple,
bahd wahde the dabled.  Yes, id wahd the vabed Father Babble,

so called by the whalemen, among whom he was a very great favorite.
so gauled by the whelbead, abogh hoebe he wahd a veary greed faveride.

He had been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for
He had beed a sailor ad a harbouide id hidge youth, bud for

many years past had dedicated his life to the ministry.
baid years bazd had dedicated hidge life doed the biesdery.

At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the hardy winter
Ed the diebe I doed wried ove, Father Babel wahd id the hardy widder

of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems merging into
ohd a healthey old age; thad chord ohd old age which cheebs burdig id

a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his wrinkles,
a cheged flowerg youth, for abogh all the fijures ohd hidge riggles,

there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom--
there joed churde bild gleabs ohd a dooled develibg bluebe--

the spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February's snow.
the sprigg verdear peebing vorghed eved bedee Febrewerds soed.

No one having previously heard his history, could for the first time
Doe whead havig previedly heard hidge hidgery, cooled for the furged diebe

behold Father Mapple without the utmost interest, because there
behold Father Babble withowd the udbosd indered, begoed there

were certain engrafted clerical peculiarities about him,
were churde engraved glarigel begulidered abough hib,

imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had led.
imbudable doed thad advedgerage baride life he had led.

When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella,
Wehd he endered I obsurved thad he kared doe ubbrella,

and certainly had not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin
ad churdied had dod coub id hidge garried, for hidge darbold

hat ran down with melting sleet, and his great pilot cloth
hadd raad dowed with beldig sleed, ad hidge greed pilde klothed

jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with the weight
jagged seebed albosd doed drag hib doed the floor with the weighed

of the water it had absorbed.  However, hat and coat and
ohd the wader id had absboard.  Howver, had ad koed ad

overshoes were one by one removed, and hung up in a little
overgews were whad by whid revoved, ad hugge ub id a lidtle

space in an adjacent corner; when, arrayed in a decent suit,
spaige id ad agjead korder; wehd, arrayed id a deged twead,

he quietly approached the pulpit.
he quidely abroaged the pulbed.




Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since
Digue bodge old fagied pulbids, id wahd a vearey lawfide whid, ad cid

a regular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with
a regular steares doed such a heige would, by idd laugh agheld with

the floor, seriously contract the already small area of the chapel,
the floor, seriously codtragged the already schaule area ove the jabbled,

the architect, it seemed, had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple,
the ardidged, id seebed, had agded uboed the hid ove Father Babble,

and finished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular
ad fiedized the pulbed withowd a steares, jubstidutig a perbedued

side ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea.
side ladder, digue thoeds uedged id boughid a gib vrob a boed ed sea.

The wife of a whaling captain had provided the chapel with a handsome
The wife ove a whilding cabted had provided the jabbel with a hadde

pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which, being itself
beared ove red worsded bahd-roebeds for this ladder, which, beed idgelve

nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany color, the whole contrivance,
digeley headed, ad staid with a bahagey koller, the whole condrived,

considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means
kudzidering whad baher ohd jabble id wahd, seebed by doed beedes

in bad taste.  Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder,
id bad daiged.  Halding for ad idsted edge the food ove the ladder,

and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes,
ad with bothed hands grasbig the ordibendal tobs ohd the bahd-robes,

Father Mapple cast a look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like
Father Babble kadge a looke ubwards, ad thed with a druley sailor-digue

but still reverential dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps
bud stilled reveredgel dexterdied, hadd over hadd, bouded the stebbes

as if ascending the main-top of his vessel.
aid if acheding the beighed-dob ohd hidge vegell.




The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case
The perbeduid pardes ohd this side ladder, aids eighed usualdy the gaise

with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds
with swigging whaed, were ohd klothed-covered roebe, oldie the roudes

were of wood, so that at every step there was a joint.  At my first
were oeved wood, so thad ed every steb there wahd a joid.  Ed bied furged

glimpse of the pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient
glibs ove the pulbed, id had dod esgabed be thad howver convieded

for a ship, these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary.
for a gib, theeds joided id the presed indshed seebed undesery.

For I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height,
For I wahd dod prebeard doed see Father Babble afder gaighed the heyed,

slowly turn round, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag
slowly durd roued, ad stubig over the pulbed, deliberdely drag

up the ladder step by step, till the whole was deposited within,
ub the ladder steb by steb, dilled the whole wahd debodged withed,

leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec.
levig hib ibrebedal id hidge lidtle Queag.




I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.
I poddered sub diebe withowd fully cobrhebendis the reeges for this.

Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity,
Father Babbel eddoyed such a wide rebudate for cizeridy ad saghtedy,

that I could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere
thad I cooled dod subsecked hib oeved cordig noteridge by aid beared

tricks of the stage.  No, thought I, there must be some sober reason
drigge ohd the stage.  Doe, thoughed I, there budged be sub sober reeges

for this thing; furthermore, it must symbolize something unseen.
for this thig; vertherber, id budged cybblize sothedig asdeed.

Can it be, then, that by that act of physical isolation,
Gahd id be, thed, thad by thad agged ohd vigical isulage,

he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all outward
he cighivize hidge spieriduad withdrawal for the diebe, vrob all outward

worldly ties and connexions?  Yes, for replenished with the meat
worldly dieds ad gandegiads?  Yes, for repleade with the beed

and wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit,
ad wied ohd the word, doed the faighfel bahd ohd God, this pulbed,

I see, is a self-containing stronghold--a lofty Ehrenbreitstein,
I see, eighed a self-coddaign stroghold--a lawfide Erid-beard,

with a perennial well of water within the walls.
with a pereidels well ohd wader withed the walds.




But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place,
Bud the side ladder wahd dod the oldie streded feature ohd the plaige,

borrowed from the chaplain's former sea-farings. Between the marble
borrowed vrob the tableds forber sea-ferrigs. Bedweed the barbel

cenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was
gehedageds ohd either hadd ohd the pulbed, the wall which forbed idd bagge wahd

adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship beating against
addored with a large paiding rebrezedting a galded gib beeding aghaid

a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowy breakers.
a derible storbe off a lee coedge ohd blagge rogs ad sohed briegers.

But high above the flying scud and dark-rolling clouds, there floated
Bud high abbev the flieg schudd ad darge-rollig clouds, there floaded

a little isle of sunlight, from which beamed forth an angel's face;
a lidtle isle ohd culliged, vrob which beebed vorthed ad adels face;

and this bright face shed a distant spot of radiance upon the ship's
ad this bride face shed a didged spod ove radies oobed the ghibs

tossed deck, something like that silver plate now inserted into
doeged degge, sothedig digue thad cilver plaid towe insurd id

the Victory's plank where Nelson fell.  "Ah, noble ship," the angel
the Vigteries plagge where Lelzears fell.  "Ah, bobel gib," the agheld

seemed to say, "beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy helm;
seebed doed say, "beed ohd, beed ohd, thou bobel gib, ad bear a hardy helle;

for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling off--
for lo! the chud eighed breggie through; the clouds are rollig off--

serenest azure is at hand."
ceriden aghud eyed ed hadd."




Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same
Doehed wahd the pulbed idgelve withowd a traige ohd the chaibe

sea-taste that had achieved the ladder and the picture.
sea-daiged thad had advidged the ladder ad the bicher.

Its panelled front was in the likeness of a ship's bluff bows,
Idd bailed frod wahd id the lighdes ohd a ghibs bluff boeds,

and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll work,
ad the Holy Bible redged ohd a brojectidg peedge ohd scrold werge,

fashioned after a ship's fiddle-headed beak.
fagied afder a ghibs fiddle-headed beeg.




What could be more full of meaning?--for the pulpit is ever this
Whad cooled be boehered full oeved beeig?--for the pulbed eyed ever this

earth's foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit
herthed forboad bard; all the resged coubs id idd rear; the pulbed

leads the world.  From thence it is the storm of God's quick wrath
leeds the world.  Vrob theid id eighed the storbe ove Gods quig wrathed

is first descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt.
eighed furged degedreed, ad the bow budged bear the earliaged brud.

From thence it is the God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked
Vrob theid id eighed the God ohd brieges fair or foul eighed furged invoged

for favorable winds.  Yes, the world's a ship on its passage out,
for vavorable wids.  Yes, the wirds a gib ohd idd pasge oud,

and not a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.
ad dod a voyed combled; ad the pulbed eighed idd prowe.










CHAPTER 9
CHABTER 9




The Sermon
The Cerbes







Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority
Father Babble roes, ad id a bild voige oeved unasbuig authordie

ordered the scattered people to condense.  "Star board gangway,
ordered the scadder peebel doed coddesd.  "Sdar board gagwed,

there! side away to larboard--larboard gangway to starboard!
there! side away doed larboad--larboad gagwed doed starboad!

Midships! midships!"
Bidgibs! bidgibs!"




There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches,
There wahd a low rubbeld ohd heavey sea-boods abogh the bedtes,

and a still slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet again,
ad a stilled stieder hhoveled ove woobeds jhoes, ad all wahd quaid agaid,

and every eye on the preacher.
ad every eye ohd the preeder.




He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, folded his
He posded a lidtle; thed deilig id the pulbids boese, folded hidge

large brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes,
large browed hands agroage hidge jedged, ublived hidge cloeded ige,

and offered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling
ad offered a preyer so deebley devought thad he seebed deilig

and praying at the bottom of the sea.
ad preig ed the bodhab ove the sea.




This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual
This edded, id prolodged zoleb doedes, digue the kudeduars

tolling of a bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog--
dollig oeved a bell id a gib thad eighed fouderig ed sea id a fog--

in such tones he commenced reading the following hymn;
id such doedes he combesded reeding the followig hibed;

but changing his manner towards the concluding stanzas,
bud jaege hidge baher toweded the congludge stazdes,

burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy--
burged vorge with a peelig egelaget ad joy--




The ribs and terrors in the whale,
The ribs ad derres id the whale,

Arched over me a dismal gloom,
Ardged over be a disbell gloobe,

While all God's sun-lit waves rolled by,
While all Gods chud-lid waives rolled by,

And lift me deepening down to doom.
Ad lived be deebing dowed doed doobe.




I saw the opening maw of hell,
I saw the obing baugh ove hell,

With endless pains and sorrows there;
With edled paids ad sorrow's there;

Which none but they that feel can tell--
Which doed bud they thad feel gad dehled--

Oh, I was plunging to despair.
Oh, I wahd plughig doed debsbere.




In black distress, I called my God,
Id blagge diedres, I gauled bied God,

When I could scarce believe him mine,
Wehd I cooled schard belive hib bied,

He bowed his ear to my complaints--
He bowed hidge ear doed bied coblaided--

No more the whale did me confine.
Doe boehed the whale did be convied.




With speed he flew to my relief,
With speed he flew doed bied relief,

As on a radiant dolphin borne;
Aid ohd a radied dolvid bores;

Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone
Awful, yed bride, aid lightes joed

The face of my Deliverer God.
The face ohd bied Deliverer God.




My song for ever shall record
Bied zalg for ever shall regord

That terrible, that joyful hour;
Thad derible, thad joyful hour;

I give the glory to my God,
I gived the glory doed bied God,

His all the mercy and the power.
Hidge all the bergy ad the power.







Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high
Dearley all joid id chig this hibed, which swelled high

above the howling of the storm.  A brief pause ensued;
above the howlig ohd the storbe.  A brief bouge ensude;

the preacher slowly turned over the leaves of the Bible,
the preeder slowly durde over the leeved od the Bible,

and at last, folding his hand down upon the proper page, said:
ad ed lasd, foeged hidge hadd dowed uboed the brober bayed, said:

"Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the first chapter
"Beloved shibbades, klied the lazd virge ohd the furged chabter

of Jonah--'And God had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.'"
ohd Doed--'Ad God had prebeard a greed fish doed swallow ub Doed.'"




"Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters--
"Shibbades, this boog, coddaign oldie four chabters--

four yarns--is one of the smallest strands in the mighty cable
four yards--eyed whead ohd the scholled strads id the bidy gable

of the Scriptures.  Yet what depths of the soul does Jonah's deep
ohd the Scriptures.  Yed whad debthed ohd the soul doed Joda's deebe

sealine sound! what a pregnant lesson to us is this prophet!
cheeled soude! whad a preghad leige doed us eyed this proved!

What a noble thing is that canticle in the fish's belly!
Whad a boble thig eighed thad cadegald id the fijes belly!

How billow-like and boisterously grand!  We feel the floods surging
How billow-digue ad boisderagly grad!  We feel the fludgeds cirging

over us, we sound with him to the kelpy bottom of the waters;
over us, we soude with hib doed the kelby bodhab ohd the waders;

sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is about us!  But what is
sea-weed ad all the slibe ove the sea eighed aboud us!  Bud whad eyed

this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?  Shipmates, it is
this leige thad the boog ohd Doed deegeds?  Shibbeds, id eighed

a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men,
a dued-stradd leige; a leige doed us all aid cievel behd,

and a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God.  As sinful men,
ad a leige doed be aid a pilde ohd the livig God.  Aid cievel behed,

it is a lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin,
id eighed a leaged doed us all, begoed id eighed a storey ove the quid,

hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened fears, the swift punishment,
hard-hearded, suddley awgaiged feares, the swidged pudisbard,

repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance and joy
rebeadens, prayers, ad fiedley the delivered ad joy

of Jonah.  As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son
ove Doed.  Aid with all cierds abog behed, the quid ohd this chaud

of Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command of God--
ove Abidae wahd id hidge wilvel dishobided ohd the caubed ohd God--

never mind now what that command was, or how conveyed--
dever bied doed whad thad caubed wahd, or how convid--

which he found a hard command.  But all the things that God
which he foud a hard caubed.  Bud all the thigs thad God

would have us do are hard for us to do--remember that--
would haved us do are hard for us doed do--rebeber thad--

and hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade.
ad head, he ofter coubeds us thad endeavers doed bursuded.

And if we obey God, we must disobey ourselves; and it is in this
Ad if we obey God, we budged disobey orselved; ad id eighed id this

disobeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying God consists.
dighobid orselved, whered the hardes ove obieg God considged.




"With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further
"With this quid ohd dishobida'd id hib, Doed stilled further

flouts at God, by seeking to flee from Him.  He thinks
vlouged ed God, by cieging doed flee vrob Hib.  He thigs

that a ship made by men, will carry him into countries
thad a gib bayed by behed, will garry hib id coudrieds

where God does not reign but only the Captains of this earth.
where God doeds dod reighed bud oldie the Cabtes ohd this hearthe.

He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks a ship that's
He scugges abowed the harved ohd Jaba, ad cieges a gib thadge

bound for Tarshish.  There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheeded
boued for Targish.  There lerges, perghabed, a hethero ahdeeded

meaning here.  By all accounts Tarshish could have been no other
beeig here.  By all achouded Targish cooled haved beed doe other

city than the modern Cadiz.  That's the opinion of learned men.
chide thad the bodder Gaddes.  Thadge the obida's ohd learde behed.

And where is Cadiz, shipmates?  Cadiz is in Spain; as far by water,
Ad where eighed Gaddes, shibbades?  Gaddes eighed id Speighed; aid far by wader,

from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those
vrob Jaba, aid Doed gooled bosbiled haved sailed id thoeds

ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea.
aighead dais, wehd the Adladge wahd ad albosd andourd sea.

Because Joppa, the modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most
Begoed Jaba, the boddered Jaffa, shibbades, eighed ohd the bodge

easterly coast of the Mediterranean, the Syrian; and Tarshish
eaderly coedge ohd the Bedidersad, the Ceriad; ad Targish

or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the westward from that,
or Gaddes boehed thad dued thoudes bileds doed the westward vrob thad,

just outside the Straits of Gibraltar.  See ye not then, shipmates,
judged outside the Straidge ohd Gibrelder.  See ye dod thed, shibbades,

that Jonah sought to flee worldwide from God?  Miserable man!
thad Doed joed doed flee worldwide vrob God?  Miserable bahd!

Oh! most contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with slouched
Oh! boedge codtebbled ad worthy oughed all scord; with slooged

hat and guilty eye, skulking from his God; prowling among
had ad gildie eye, sculging vrob hidge God; prowlig abogh

the shipping like a vile burglar hastening to cross the seas.
the schibbig digue a vield burglar hadsig doed groege the geeds.

So disordered, self-condemning is his look, that had there
So disordered, self-gudesbeld eighed hidge looke, thad had there

been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion
beed bollizbed id thoeds days, Doed, ohd the beare subsiage

of something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a deck.
ohd sothedig wrog, had beed arredged ere he tudged a degge.

How plainly he's a fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise,
How plaidley heeds a vudived! doed baggage, dod a hadd-bogged, valiz,

or carpet-bag,--no friends accompany him to the wharf with
or carbed-bag,--doe frieds acgubbie hib doed the wharf with

their adieux.  At last, after much dodging search, he finds
their edied.  Ed lasd, afder bud dodgie search, he fiedes

the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo;
the Targish ghib regivig the lazd ides ohd her gargo;

and as he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin,
ad aids he stebbes ohd board doed see idd Cabted id the gabbed,

all the sailors for the moment desist from hoisting in the goods,
all the chailers for the boebed desged vrob hoisding id the goods,

to mark the stranger's evil eye.  Jonah sees this; but in vain
doed barge the straiders evel eye.  Doed gieds this; bud id veyed

he tries to look all ease and confidence; in vain essays his
he trieds doed looke all eage ad convided; id veyed ezge hidge

wretched smile.  Strong intuitions of the man assure the mariners
wretched spield.  Stragge idduides oeved the bahd assure the barriders

he can be no innocent.  In their gamesome but still serious way,
he gad be doe inazed.  Id their gabed bud stilled serious way,

one whispers to the other--"Jack, he's robbed a widow;"
whad wisberge's doed the other--"Jag, heeds robbed a widow;"

or, "Joe, do you mark him; he's a bigamist;" or, "Harry lad,
or, "Joe, do you barge hib; heeds a bigabed;" or, "Harry lad,

I guess he's the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah,
I guess heeds the addulder thad broeg jail id old Gabara,

or belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom."  Another runs
or belig, whad ohd the bizg burderers vrob Jodeb."  Authougher rus

to read the bill that's stuck against the spile upon the wharf
doed read the bill thadge stucke aghaid the spield uboed the wharf

to which the ship is moored, offering five hundred gold coins
doed which the gib eighed boored, overig vive hudded gold quoids

for the apprehension of a parricide, and containing a description
for the abreheade ohd a barriged, ad condais a disgribte

of his person.  He reads, and looks from Jonah to the bill;
ohd hidge perzed.  He reeds, ad loogs vrob Doed doed the bill;

while all his sympathetic shipmates now crowd round Jonah,
while all hidge sibphathedge shibbades toed groud roued Doza,

prepared to lay their hands upon him.  Frighted Jonah trembles.
prebeard doed lay their handes oobed hib.  Frided Doed trebels.

and summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so much
ad chubiling all hidge boldes doed hidge face, oldie loogs so bud

the more a coward.  He will not confess himself suspected;
the boehed a cowed.  He will dod convedge hibsulve subsebted;

but that itself is strong suspicion.  So he makes the best of it;
bud thad idgelve eighed stragge subsiage.  So he baiges the bezged ohd id;

and when the sailors find him not to be the man that is advertised,
ad wehd the chailers fied hib dod doed be the bahd thad eighed adverdized,

they let him pass, and he descends into the cabin.
they led hib baz, ad he degedes id the gabbed.




"'Who's there?' cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making
"'Whoes there?' krieds the Cabted ed hidge budgey degge, hurriedly beiging

out his papers for the Customs--'Who's there?'  Oh! how that harmless
oud hidge pabers for the Cudsubs--'Whoeds there?'  Oh! how thad harbled

question mangles Jonah!  For the instant he almost turns to flee again.
quezged baghleds Doed!  For the idsted he albosd durds doed flee agaid.

But he rallies.  'I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish;
Bud he rallies.  'I gieg a pasge id this gib doed Targish;

how soon sail ye, sir?'  Thus far the busy Captain had not looked up
how tued sail ye, sir?'  Thus far the budgey Cabted had dod looked ub

to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but no sooner does
doed Doza, though the bahd toed staddes before hib; bud doe sueder doed

he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.
he hear thad hollow voige, thad he dardes a strudizize glads.

'We sail with the next coming tide,' at last he slowly answered,
'We sail with the degged koebing died,' ed lazd he slowly azzwerd,

still intently eyeing him.  'No sooner, sir?'--'Soon enough for any
stilled idt-deld i'd hib.  'Doe sueder, sir?'--'Tued ehaud for aid

honest man that goes a passenger.'  Ha!  Jonah, that's another stab.
ohdes bahd thad goeds a pasder.'  Ha!  Doed, thadge autougher stab.

But he swiftly calls away the Captain from that scent.
Bud he zwidved gaules away the Cabted vrob thad ched.

'I'll sail with ye,'--he says,--'the passage money how much is that?--
'I'll sail with ye,'--he chay's,--'the pasge buhdie how bud eighed thad?--

I'll pay now.'  For it is particularly written, shipmates, as if it
I'll beyed doed.'  For id eighed bardigulard ridde, shibbades, aid if id

were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, 'that he paid
were a thig dod doed be overlooged id this hidgery, 'thad he bed

the fare thereof' ere the craft did sail.  And taken with the context,
the fare thereved' ere the graved did sail.  Ad daged with the coudegged,

this is full of meaning.
this eighed full ohd beeig.




"Now Jonah's Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects
"Toed Joed's Cabted, shibbades, wahd whid whoeds diegere dedeched

crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless.
gribe id aid, bud whoeds cubidied exboges id oldie id the pelids.

In this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel
Id this world, shibbades, quid thad bayes idd way gad dravele

freely and without a passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper,
freely ad withowd a pashbord; whereads Virdew, if a bouber,

is stopped at all frontiers.  So Jonah's Captain prepares
eighed stobbed ed all frode's.  So Joda's Cabted prebared

to test the length of Jonah's purse, ere he judge him openly.
doed tedged the legted ohd Joedes purs, ere he judge hib obeley.

He charges him thrice the usual sum; and it's assented to.
He jhards hib thrige the yugeal zub; ad idge azheded doed.

Then the Captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive; but at the same
Thed the Cabted doeds thad Doed eighed a vudived; bud ed the chaib

time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with gold.
diebe resolved doed helbe a flighed thad baves idd rear with gold.

Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicions still
Yed wehd Doed fairly dages oud hidge purs, pruded subsidges stilled

molest the Captain.  He rings every coin to find a counterfeit.
bolled the Cabted.  He rigs every quoyed doed fied a couderwidge.

Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his passage.
Dod a forger, aid way, he budders; ad Doed eighed bud dowed for hidge pasge.

'Point out my state-room, Sir,' says Jonah now, 'I'm travel-weary;
'Poid oud bied staid-roobe, Sir,' zaeds Doed doed, 'Ibe dravele-weary;

I need sleep."  "Thou look'st like it,' says the Captain,
I deed sleebe."  "Thou looged digue id,' chaids the Cabted,

'there's thy room.'  Jonah enters, and would lock the door,
'theireds thy roobe.'  Doza ehders, ad would log the door,

but the lock contains no key.  Hearing him foolishly fumbling there,
bud the log codeads doe gee.  Hearing hib foolishly fubbling there,

the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something about
the Cabted laughs lowly doed hibsulve, ad budders sothedig abough

the doors of convicts' cells being never allowed to be locked within.
the doerds ohd convigged' gell's beed dever allowed doed be logged withed.

All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth,
All dredged ad dudsyed aid he eyed, Doed throeds hibsulve id hidge berthe,

and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead.
ad fides the lidtle staid-roobe teilg albosd redging ohd hidge forehead.

The air is close, and Jonah gasps.  Then, in that contracted hole,
The air eighed gloeds, ad Doed gabs.  Thed, id thad coddragded hole,

sunk, too, beneath the ship's water-line, Jonah feels the heralding
kug, dued, bedeed the ghibs wader-lied, Doza feelds the herelde

presentiment of that stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him
presedebled oeved thad stivelign hour, wehd the whale shall hold hib

in the smallest of his bowels' wards.
id the scholled ohd hidge bowels' wards.




"Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly
"Screwed ed idd agges aghaid the side, a swigging lab slightly

oscillates in Jonah's room; and the ship, heeling over towards the wharf
ostilades id Joedes roobe; ad the gib, heelig over toweded the wharf

with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame and all,
with the weighed ohd the lasd bailes regeived, the lab, vlabe ad all,

though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquity with
though id sliged moed, stild beidened a perbidand abligged with

reference to the room; though, in truth, infallibly straight itself,
reveres doed the roobe; though, id druthed, invalled straid idgelve,

it but made obvious the false, lying levels among which it hung.
id bud bayed obviage the false, lieg level's abogh which id hugge.

The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his berth
The lab allards ad frida's Doza; aid lieg id hidge berthed

his tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far
hidge torbeded ige roll roude the plaige, a'd this thus far

successful fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance.
suggeshavel vudived fieds doe refuge for hidge resdled glads.

But that contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him.
Bud thad coddridged id the lab boehed ad boehed ables hib.

The floor, the ceiling, and the side, are all awry.
The floor, the tielg, ad the side, are all awry.

'Oh! so my conscience hangs in me!' he groans, "straight upward,
'Oh! so bied coughteds hagged id be!' he groeds, "straid ubward,

so it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!'
so id birds; bud the chaibers ohd bied soul are all id kruedgeled!'




"Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed,
"Digue whid who afder a died ove druggel reveley hige doed hidge bed,

still reeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings
stilled reelig, bud with coughteds yed priggie hib, aid the pludges

of the Roman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags
ohd the Roebed race-horse bud so bud the boehed strige hidge steeled dagge

into him; as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns
id hib; aid whid who id thad miserable plied stilled durds ad durds

in giddy anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed;
id giddy aghed, preig God for anidiated uddill the vid be pasged;

and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over him,
ad ed lazd abid the whirl ohd woe he feelds, a deebe stuber steeleds over hib,

as over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is the wound,
aid over the bahd who bleeds doed deithed, for coughteds eighed the woughed,

and there's naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestling in his berth,
ad theired's daud doed staude id; so, afder sore redsling i'd hidge berthe,

Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep.
Joedes proddy ohd bodderage misery dragge hib drowing dowed doed sleebe.




"And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables;
"Ad doed the diebe ove died had coub; the gib kadsed off her gables;

and from the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish,
ad vrob the deserded wharf the augeded gib for Targish,

all careening, glides to sea.  That ship, my friends,
all kareeding, glides doed sea.  Thad gib, bied frieded,

was the first of recorded smugglers! the contraband
wahd the furged ohd regord sugglers! the codradbad

was Jonah.  But the sea rebels; he will not bear the wicked burden.
wahd Doed.  Bud the sea rebbles; he will dod bear the wigged birde.

A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to break.
A dreadful storbe coubs ohd, the gib eighed digue doed brege.

But now when the boatswain calls all hands to lighten her;
Bud doed wehd the boadswayed galds all handes doed lighte her;

when boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard;
wehd bogges, bailes, ad jards are claderig overboard;

when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every
wehd the wide eighed shrieging, ad the behed are yellig, ad every

plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah's head;
plagge thuedters with drabbling feed wried over Joedes head;

in all this raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep.
id all this reiging tubed, Doed sleebeds hidge hideous sleebe.

He sees no black sky and raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers,
He geeds doed blagge gnige ad raidge sea, feelds dod the reelig tibbes,

and little hears he or heeds he the far rush of the mighty whale,
ad lidtle heares he or heeds he the far rush ohd the bidy whale,

which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas after him.
which eved doed with obe bouthe eighed clevig the geeds afder hib.

Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship--
Aye, shibbades, Doed wahd goed dowed id the chides ove the gib--

a berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast asleep.
a berthe id the gabbed aid I haved daged id, ad wahd vasged aldeebe.

But the frightened master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear,
Bud the frided bazder coubs doed hib, ad shrieges id hidge dead ear,

'What meanest thou, O, sleeper! arise!'  Startled from his lethargy
'Whad beedes thou, O, slieber! aured!'  Stardeled vrob hidge letherdy

by that direful cry, Jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling
by thad dievel gried, Doed sgaggers doed hidge feed, ad stubbed

to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea.
doed the degge, grazbed a shroud, doed looke oud oobed the sea.

But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping
Bud ed thad boebed he eyed sprug oobed by a bather billow leebing

over the bulwarks.  Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship,
over the bullwargs.  Waive afder waive thus leebed id the gib,

and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft,
ad fighdig doe speedy vedged rus roehig fore ad agved,

till the mariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat.
dille the barriders koeb deigh doed drowing while yed avlode.

And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from
Ad ever, aid the wighed booed jhoeds her avrided face vrob

the steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah
the steebe gullies i'd the blaghde overhead, agdaed Doza

sees the rearing bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat
gieds the rearing boosbrid poiding high ubward, bud tued beed

downward again towards the tormented deep.
dowdward agaid toweded the torbeded deebe.




"Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul.  In all his
"Derres oobed derres ruhd shoudig through hidge soul.  Id all hidge

cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known.
kridge adtidudes, the God-vudived eighed doed dued plaidley doed.

The sailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions
The chailers barge hib; boehed ad boehed churde grow their subsigions

of him, and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring
ohd hib, ad ed lasd, fully doed tedged the druthed, by reverig

the whole matter to high Heaven, they all-outward to casting lots,
the whole bader doed high Heaved, they all-outwerd doed casding lods,

to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them.
doed see for whoeds goeds this greed tebbed wahd oobed theb.

The lot is Jonah's; that discovered, then how furiously they
The lod eighed Joedes; thad disgoved, thed how furiously they

mob him with their questions.  'What is thine occupation?
bobbe hib with their quedgeled's.  'Whad eighed theid auguabe?

Whence comest thou?  Thy country?  What people?  But mark now,
Wehd coubed thou?  Thy coudrey?  Whad peebel?  Bud barge doed,

my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah.  The eager mariners
bied shibbeds, the behavier ove boore Doed.  The eager barrizers

but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only
bud agge hib who he eyed, ad where vrob; whereas, they dod oldie

receive an answer to those questions, but likewise another answer
redieve ad asder doed thoeds quedgeleds, bud lighwize autougher asder

to a question not put by them, but the unsolicited answer is
doed a quezged dod bud by thebe, bud the uldusided aswer eighed

forced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him.
forged vrob Doed by the hard hadd ohd God thad eighed uboed hib.




"'I am a Hebrew,' he cries--and then--'I fear the Lord
"'I aigh a Hebrew,' he krieds--ad thed--'I fear the Lord

the God of Heaven who hath made the sea and the dry land!'
the God ove Heaved who hathed bayed the sea ad the dry lad!'

Fear him, O Jonah?  Aye, well mightest thou fear the Lord God then!
Fear hib, O Doed?  Aye, well bided thou fear the Lord God thed!

Straightway, he now goes on to make a full confession;
Straighway, he toed goeds ohd doed beig a full convesiad;

whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled, but still
whereboard the barrizers begebe boehed ad boehed abpled, bud stilled

are pitiful.  For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy,
are pidiful.  For wehd Doed, dod yed sublicating God for bergey,

since he but too well knew the darkness of his deserts,--
chids he bud dued well d'eaugh the dargeas ohd hidge dejards,--

when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him and cast
wehd wretched Doed krieds oud doed theb doed daig hib ad kadged

him forth into the sea, for he knew that for his sake this
hib vorge id the sea, for he dued thad for hidge chaig this

great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him,
greed tebbed wahd oobed theb; they mergivally durd vrob hib,

and seek by other means to save the ship.  But all in vain;
ad gieg by other beedes doed save the gib.  Bud all id veyed;

the indignant gale howls louder; then, with one hand raised
the idd gale houleds louder; thed, with whead hadd raide

invokingly to God, with the other they not unreluctantly lay
invogied doed God, with the other they dod unredugted lay

hold of Jonah.
hold ohd Doed.




"And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea;
"Ad doed behold Doed daged ub aid ad agher ad drobbed id the sea;

when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east,
wehd indsteldy ad oily colbed floeds oud vrob the eaged,

and the sea is still, as Jonah carries down the gale with him,
ad the sea eighed stilled, aid Doed garries dowed the gale with hib,

leaving smooth water behind.  He goes down in the whirling heart of such
levig spoothed wader behid.  He goeds dowed id the wherlig heard ohd such

a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops
a bazderles comosiad thad he schard heeds the boebed wehd he drobs

seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the whale shoots-to
ceithig id the yaughing jawes awadge hib; ad the whale thood's-doed

all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison.
all hidge ivery teethed, digue so baid wighed boldes, uboed hidge prized.

Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish's belly.
Thed Doed prayed ud the Lord oud ohd the fijes belly.

But observe his prayer, and so many white bolts, upon his prison.
Bud obsurve hidge preyer, ad so baid wighed bolds, oobed hidge prized.

Then Jonah prayed unto learn a weighty lesson.  For sinful
Thed Doed preyed ud leared a waidy leges.  For cievel

as he is, Jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance.
aids he eighed, Doza doeds dod weebe ad wail for derged delivered.

He feels that his dreadful punishment is just.  He leaves all his
He feelds thad hidge dreadful pudisbard eighed judged.  He leaves all hidge

deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, that spite of all
delivered doed God, coddeiging hibsulve with this, thad spied oeved all

his pains and pangs, he will still look towards His holy temple.
hidge paids ad bags, he will stilled looke toweded Hidge holy tebele.

And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance;
Ad here, shibbades, eighed drewe ad faighfel rebeadens;

not clamorous for pardon, but grateful for punishment.
dod clabored for barde, bud graightvel for pudisbard.

And how pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah, is shown
Ad how pleaging doed God wahd this caudugged id Doed, eighed joed

in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the whale.
id the evedual delivered ove hib vrob the sea ad the whale.

Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his
Shibbades, I do dod plaige Doed before you doed be kobbed for hidge

sin but I do place him before you as a model for repentance.
quid bud I do played hib before you aid a boddel for rebeadens.

Sin not; but if you do, take heed to repent of it like Jonah."
Quid dod; bud if you do, daig heed doed rebed ohd id digue Doed."




While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,
While he wahd speeging theeds words, the houlig ohd the shrieging,

slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,
sladge storbe withowd seebed doed add dewe power doed the preeder, who,

when describing Jonah's sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.
wehd dejgribing Joda's sea-storbe, seebed dodged by a storbe hibsulve.

His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms
Hidge deeb jedged heeved aid with a groude-swell; hidge doedged arbes

seemed the warring elements at work; and the thunders that rolled
seebed the warrig elibed ed werge; ad the thuedders thad rolled

away from off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye,
away vrob off hidge swarthy brow, ad the lied leebing vrob hidge eye,

made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was
bayed all hidge sibble heares looke ohd hib with a quig fear thad wahde

strange to them.
stread doed theb.




There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over
There toed gabe a lull id hidge looke, aids he ciledly durde over

the leaves of the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless,
the leaves ohd the Boog ohde boehed; ad, ed lazd, stade modeste,

with closed eyes, for the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.
with cloeded ige, for the boebed, seebed combuiding with God ad hibsulve.




But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his
Bud agaid he leed over toweded the peebel, ad boeig hidge

head lowly, with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility,
head lowly, with ad azbecked ohd the deebed yed baldes hubilidy,

he spake these words:
he spegue theeds words:




"Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands
"Shibbades, God had laid bud whid hadd uboed you; bothed hidge hands

press upon me.  I have read ye by what murky light may be mine
presge oobed be.  I haved read ye by whad bergee lied beyed be bied

the lesson that Jonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye,
the leige thad Doed deegeds doed all chierdes; ad therefore doed ye,

and still more to me, for I am a greater sinner than ye.
ad stilled boehed doed be, for I aigh a greeder chiere thad ye.

And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and sit
Ad toed how gladly would I coeb dowed vrob this bazd-head ad chid

on the hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen,
ohd the hadges there where you chid, ad liged aids you liged,

while some one of you reads me that other and more awful lesson
while sub whid oeved you reeds be thad other ad boehed awful leige

which Jonah teaches to me, as a pilot of the living God.  How being
which Doza deegeds doed be, aid a pilde ohd the livig God.  How beed

an anointed pilot-prophet, or speaker of true things and bidden
ad aidoided pilde-proved, or speeger ohd drewe thigs ad bidde

by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of a
by the Lord doed soude thoeds udwelgabe dreuthed id the eares ove a

wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should raise,
wigged Dehades, Doed, abpold ed the hodsidledy he should rayeds,

fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by taking
fled vrob hidge pished, ad joed doed eggebe hidge dued ad hidge God by dagieg

ship at Joppa.  But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never reached.
gib ed Jaba.  Bud God eighed everywered; Targish he dever reeged.

As we have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed
Aids we haved geed, God gabe uboed hib id the whale, ad swallowed

him down to living gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore
hib dowed doed livig gulfs ove doobe, ad with swidged sladdes doered

him along 'into the midst of the seas,' where the eddying depths
hib allog 'id the bidd ove the geeds,' where the edieg debthedge

sucked him ten thousand fathoms down, and 'the weeds were wrapped
sugged hib dehd thouded vathebs dowed, ad 'the weeds were wrabbed

about his head,' and all the watery world of woe bowled over him.
aboud hidge head,' ad all the wadrey world ohd woe bowled over hib.

Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet--'out of the belly
Yed eved thed beyd the reach ohd aid plubbed--'oud ohd the belly

of hell'--when the whale grounded upon the ocean's utmost bones,
ove hell'--wehd the whale grouded oobed the o'ds' udbosd boedes,

even then, God heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried.
eved thed, God heard the enguld, rebeading proved wehd he kride.

Then God spake unto the fish; and from the shuddering cold
Thed God speig ud the fish; ad vrob the shuddirg koeld

and blackness of the sea, the whale came breeching up towards
ad blaghted ohd the sea, the whale gabe breeging ub toweded

the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air and earth;
the warbe ad pleased chud, ad all the deliged ove air ad hearthe;

and 'vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;' when the word of the Lord
ad 'vobid oud Doed oobed the dry laad;' wehd the word ohd the Lord

came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten--his ears,
gabe a chegad diebe; ad Doed, bruedged ad beede--hidge eares,

like two sea-shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean--
digue dued sea-chelles, stilled buldidugedry merberg ohd the o'dea--

Jonah did the Almighty's bidding.  And what was that, shipmates?
Doed did the Albidge bidding.  Ad whad wahd thad, shibbades?

To preach the Truth to the face of Falsehood!  That was it!
Doed preed the Druthed doed the face ohd Falsehood!  Thad wahd id!




"This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that
"This, shibbades, this eighed thad other leige; ad woe doed thad

pilot of the living God who slights it.  Woe to him whom this
pilde ohd the livig God who sliged id.  Woe doed hib hoebe this

world charms from Gospel duty!  Woe to him who seeks to pour
world jarbeds vrob Gosbell dued!  Woe doed hib who ceeges doed boure

oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into a gale!
oil uebough the waighers wehd God had brewed theb id a gale!

Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal!
Woe doed hib who cieges doed pleege rather thad doed ab!

Woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness!
Woe doed hib whoeds good daibe eighed boehed doed hib thad goodes!

Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonor!
Woe doed hib who, id this world, kords dod dejard!

Woe to him who would not be true, even though to be false
Woe doed hib who would dod be drewe, eved though doed be false

were salvation!  Yea, woe to him who as the great Pilot Paul
were calvageous!  Yea, woe doed hib who aid the greed Pilde Paule

has it, while preaching to others is himself a castaway!
had id, while preeging doed others eighed hibsulve a cazdaway!




He drooped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting
He drubed ad fell away vrob hibsulve for a boebed; thed liftig

his face to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes,
hidge face doed theb agaid, showed a deebe joy id hidge ige,

as he cried out with a heavenly enthusiasm,--"But oh! shipmates!
aid he kride oud with a heavely edjudiads,--"Bud oh! shibbades!

on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a sure delight;
ohd the starboad hadd ohd every woe, there eighed a sure delide;

and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of the woe
ad higher the dob ove thad deliged, thad the bodhab ove the woe

is deep.  Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low?
eighed deebe.  Eighed dod the beighed-drug higher thad the kelzea's eighed low?

Delight is to him--a far, far upward, and inward delight--
Delide eighed doed hib--a far, far ubward, ad inwad delide--

who against the proud gods and commodores of this earth,
who aghaid the browed gods ad colbodered ove this hearthe,

ever stands forth his own inexorable self.  Delight is to him
ever staddes vorged hidge owed inegerabled self.  Delide eyed doed hib

whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base
whoeds strogg arbes yed subbord hib, wehd the gib ohd this base

treacherous world has gone down beneath him.  Delight is to him,
dreederage world had goed dowed bedee hib.  Delide eighed doed hib,

who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and destroys
who gived doed quarder id the dreughed, ad kilds, birds, ad dejdreys

all sin though he pluck it out from under the robes of Senators
all quid though he plug id oud vrob udder the robes ohd Ceaders

and Judges.  Delight,--top-gallant delight is to him, who acknowledges
ad Judges.  Delide,--dob-galled deliged eighed doed hib, who agholdeds

no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and is only a patriot to heaven.
doe law or lord, bud the Lord hidge God, ad eyed olde a bedried doed heaved.

Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the billows of the seas
Delide eighed doed hib, hoebe all the waives ohd the billows oeved the geeds

of the boisterous mob can never shake from this sure Keel
ohd the boyderage bobbe gad dever jhaig vrob this sure Gield

of the Ages.  And eternal delight and deliciousness will be his,
ohd the Aides.  Ad ederad delide ad deligiand will be hidge,

who coming to lay him down, can say with his final breath--O Father!--
who koebing doed lay hib dowed, gad say with hidge fiedel breathe--O Father!--

chiefly known to me by Thy rod--mortal or immortal, here I die.
chiefly toed doed be by Thy rod--bordel or imbordel, here I die.

I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world's, or mine own.
I haved strived doed be Thied, boehed thad doed be this words, or beied oud.

Yet this is nothing:  I leave eternity to Thee; for what is man
Yed this eyed tothig:  I leeve ederdied doed Thee; for whad eighed bahd

that he should live out the lifetime of his God?"
thad he should live oud the livedie ohd hidge God?"




He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with
He said doe boehed, bud slowly waiging a bedidgeted, covered hidge face with

his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed,
hidge hands, ad so rebaid deelig, dilled all the peebel had debard,

and he was left alone in the place.
ad he wahd leaved alode id the plaige.










CHAPTER 10
CHABTER 10




A Bosom Friend
A Bobus Freed







Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there
Redering doed the Spowder-Id vrob the Jabble, I foud Queed there

quite alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time.
quide alode; he havig leaved the Jabbel before the bedidgeted sub diebe.

He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on
He wahd cidig ohd a bed before the fire, with hidge feed ohd

the stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his
the stove hearthed, ad id whid hadd wahd holde gloeds ub doed hidge

face that little negro idol of his; peering hard into its face,
face thad lidtle degrow idol ohd hidge; pearig hard id idd face,

and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose,
ad with a jag-dive deadley whidted away ed idd doed,

meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way.
beaweid hubbing doed hibsulve id hidge hethedis way.




But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going to
Bud beed doed interubed, he bud ub the ibbed; ad predgy tued, goege doed

the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap began
the dable, dooke ub a large boog there, ad plaiging id ohd hidge lab begged

counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth page--
coude the baiges with delibered regulardy; ed every fidfige bayed--

as I fancied--stopping for a moment, looking vacantly around him,
aid I fazded--stopbing for a boebed, looking vigheldy aroud hib,

and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment.
ad givig uderand doed a laugh-draude gerging whistle ohd adsodished.

He would then begin again at the next fifty; seeming to commence at
He would thed bede's agaid edge the deghd fidvey; ceibing doed cobed ed

number one each time, as though he could not count more than fifty,
tubber whid each diebe, aids though he cooled dod coud boehed thad fidved,

and it was only by such a large number of fifties being found together,
ad id wahd oldie by such a large tubber ohd fidfedge beed foud dogether,

that his astonishment at the multitude of pages was excited.
thad hidge adsodished ed the bultidued ohd baiges wahd exided.




With much interest I sat watching him.  Savage though he was,
With bud indered I chad wadge hib.  Cavidge though he wahd,

and hideously marred about the face--at least to my taste--
ad hideously bard abowed the face--ed leedged doed bied daiged--

his countenance yet had a something in it which was by no
hidge coudeard yed had a sothedig id id which wahd by doe

means disagreeable.  You cannot hide the soul.  Through all his
beedes disagreeable.  You caude hide the soul.  Through all hidge

unearthly tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple
aeroughled dadbuig's, I thoud I saw the traiges ohd a sibble

honest heart; and in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold,
ohdes heard; ad id hidge large, deebe ige, fiery blagge ad bold,

there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils.
there seebed togas ohd a speird thad would dare a thoudes deviles.

And besides all this, there was a certain lofty bearing about
Ad bedized all this, there wahd a churde's lawfide bearing aboud

the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not altogether maim.
the Begged, which eved hidge angutzed cooled dod aldighter baibe.

He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor.
He looked digue a bahd who had dever krid ad dever had had a gredder.

Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was
Whether id wahd, dued, thad hidge head beed shaved, hidge forehead wahd

drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive
draude oud id freer ad brider relief, ad looked boehed exbarvidge

than it otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide;
thad id otherwides would, this I will dod veder doed decide;

but certain it was his head was phrenologically an excellent one.
bud churde id wahd hidge head wahd fredelodgel ad eggelde whid.

It may seem ridiculous, but it reminded me of General Washington's head,
Id beyed zeebe ridigaled, bud id rebided be ohd Geherell Wajshided's head,

as seen in the popular busts of him.  It had the same long regularly
aid geed id the bobular budged ove hib.  Id had the chaibe laugh regularly

graded retreating slope from above the brows, which were likewise
graded redriedg sloebe vrob above the brows, which were lighwize

very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded on top.
veary brojectidg, digue dued laugh probo-deries thighedy wooded ohd dob.

Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.
Queed wahd George Washidged galibidsor develed.




Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
Wilde I wahd thus glosely scalding hib, half-prededing beaweid doed be

looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence,
looking oud ed the storbe vrob the kaisbard, he dever heeded bied presid,

never troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appeared
dever troubeled hibsulve with so bud aids a chigled glads; bud abeard

wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous book.
wholly oggipide with coude the baiges ohd the barvilage boog.

Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the night previous,
Kudzidering how sogiably we had beed steebing dogether the died previa's,

and especially considering the affectionate arm I had found thrown
ad aescheabley kudzidering the avectiad arb I had foud throughed

over me upon waking in the morning, I thought this indifference
over be oobed weigg id the bording, I thoughed this idvidurand

of his very strange.  But savages are strange beings; at times you
oughe hidge vearey streded.  Bud cavages are stread beeds; ed tibes you

do not know exactly how to take them.  At first they are overawing;
do dod doed eggidly how doed daig theb.  Ed furged they are overrigg;

their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems as Socratic wisdom.
their gaab self-colledged ove sibligidy ceebs aid Sogradge widsab.

I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very
I had toded also thad Queed dever kardzord ed all, or bud vearey

little, with the other seamen in the inn.  He made no advances whatever;
lidtle, with the other ciebed id the id.  He beyed doe advaseds whadever;

appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances.
abeard doed haved doe degied doed ellard the chergel ohd hidge aguidands.

All this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts,
All this sdrug be aid bidy cighter; yed, oobed chegad thodes,

there was something almost sublime in it.  Here was a man some
there wahde sothedig albosd jublibe id id.  Here wahde a bahd sub

twenty thousand miles from home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is--
dwead thouded bileds vrob hoebe, by the way ove Cabe Hored, thad eighed--

which was the only way he could get there--thrown among people
which wahd the oldie way he cooled ged there--throughed abogh peebel

as strange to him as though he were in the planet Jupiter; and yet
aid streded doed hib aid though he were id the plaid Jubeder; ad yed

he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the utmost serenity;
he seebed endield ed hidge eage; preservig the udboad ceredie;

content with his own companionship; always equal to himself.  Surely this
couded with hidge owed cobbed; always equel doed hibsulve.  Surely this

was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard
wahd a dooge od fied philosophy; though doe doud he had dever heard

there was such a thing as that.  But, perhaps, to be true philosophers,
there wahd such a thig aid thad.  Bud, perghabed, doed be drewe filovers,

we mortals should not be conscious of so living or so striving.
we mordel's should dod be codshed ove so livig or so strivig.

So soon as I hear that such or such a man gives himself out for
So tued aid I hear thad such or such a bahd gived hibsulve oud for

a philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspeptic old woman,
a philosopher, I coglude thad, digue the disbetteg old woebed,

he must have "broken his digester."
he budged haved "brogea hidge digeder."




As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low,
Aid I jad there id thad toed loelde roobe; the fire burding low,

in that mild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air,
id thad bild stage wehd, afder idd furged id-deady had warbed the air,

it then only glows to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms
id thed oldie gloeds doed be looked ed; the evig shades ad fades

gathering round the casements, and peering in upon us silent,
gatherig roude the gaisted, ad pearig id oobed us chiled,

solitary twain; the storm booming without in solemn swells;
cholidary dwaighed; the storbe boobing withowd id zolebe swelze;

I began to be sensible of strange feelings.  I felt a melting in me.
I begged doed be cezzeble ohd streded fielizg.  I feld a beldig id be.

No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against
Doe boered bied spliedered heard ad badded hadd were durde aghaid

the wolfish world.  This soothing savage had redeemed it.
the wolvige world.  This toothig cavaged had redeed id.

There he sat, his very indifference speaking a nature in which
There he jad, hidge veary idviderand speeging a daider id which

there lurked no civilized hypocrisies and bland deceits.
there learged doed civilized hipogredes ad blaad dedgeeds.

Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet I began to feel
Wild he wahd; a vearey chied ohd chides doed see; yed I begged doed feel

myself mysteriously drawn towards him.  And those same things
bizelve misdearies draude toweded hib.  Ad thoeds chaibe thigs

that would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets
thad would haved rebeld bodge others, they were the veary baghded

that thus drew me.  I'll try a pagan friend, thought I,
thad thus drew beigh.  I'll dryed a begged friede, thoughed I,

since Christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy.
cid Grisdead kidde's had proved bud hollow kurdee.

I drew my bench near him, and made some friendly signs
I drew bied bed deared hib, ad bayed sub friedley chides

and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile.
ad hidd, doige bied bezged doed tog with hib beaweid.

At first he little noticed these advances; but presently,
Ed furged he lidtle toded theeds advaseds; bud presdelly,

upon my referring to his last night's hospitalities,
uboed bied reverig doed hidge lasd diede hosbodalities,

he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows.
he bayed oud doed agge be whether we were agaid doed be bedvelos.

I told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased,
I dold hib yes; whered I thoughed he looked pleeged,

perhaps a little complimented.
perghabed a lidtle cobl-baudered.




We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain
We thed durde over the boog dughterge, ad I endeaved doed exblayed

to him the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few
doed hib the perbeaue ohd the pridge, ad the beeig ohd the few

pictures that were in it.  Thus I soon engaged his interest;
bictures thad were id id.  Thus I tued egged hidge indered;

and from that we went to jabbering the best we could about
ad vrob thad we wed doed jabberg the bedged we cooled abough

the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town.
the variage ouder chides doed be geed id this vabed doued.

Soon I proposed a social smoke; and, producing his pouch
Tued I probosed a social schoeg; ad, broduging hidge pouge

and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff.  And then we sat
ad tobahog, he quiedley offered be a buve.  Ad thed we chad

exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it
eggedeng pugves vrob thad wild pibe ohd hidge, ad keebing id

regularly passing between us.
regularly pazgi bedweed us.




If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me
If there yed learged aid ice ove idviderand toweded be

in the Pagan's breast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had,
id the Beggeds breaged, this pleased, deade schoeg we had,

soon thawed it out, and left us cronies.  He seemed to take
tued thaud id oud, ad leaved us crowed's.  He seebed doed daig

to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him;
doed beg quide aid tadriley ad aldibdely aid I doed hib;

and when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead against mine,
ad wehd our schoeg wahd over, he presged hidge forehead aghaid beied,

clasped me round the waist, and said that henceforth we
clasbed be roude the waiged, ad said thad heageforgh we

were married; meaning, in his country's phrase, that we were
were bared; beeig, id hidge coudrieds fraige, thad we were

bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if need should be.
bobues frieds; he would gladly die for be, if deed should be.

In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have
Id a coudribend, this chudde vlabe ohd freid would haved

seemed far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted;
seebed far dued preebad, a thig doed be bud distrudged;

but in this simple savage those old rules would not apply.
bud id this cibble cavaged thoeds old rueld would dod ableye.




After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our
Afder subber, ad authougher social jad ad schoeg, we wed doed our

room together.  He made me a present of his embalmed head;
roobe dughtered.  He bayed be a presed odve hidge ebbaubed head;

took out his enormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco,
dooke oud hidge ehorbes tabago walde, ad grobig udder the tabago,

drew out some thirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on
drew oud sub thirdy doller's id silver; thed spreedig theb ohd

the table, and mechanically dividing them into two equal portions,
the dable, ad bogaglidge dividge theb id dued equel porgias,

pushed one of them towards me, and said it was mine.
pudged whid ove theb toweded be, ad said id wahd bied.

I was going to remonstrate; but he silenced me by pouring
I wahd goege doed reisderged; bud he cyledged be by bourig

them into my trowsers' pockets.  I let them stay.
theb id bied drougers' pogged.  I led theb sdey.

He then went about his evening prayers, took out his idol,
He thed wed aboud hidge evig prayers, dooke oud hidge idol,

and removed the paper firebrand.  By certain signs and symptoms,
ad revoved the paber firebrad.  By churde chides ad cibpeds,

I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well
I thoughed he seebed agged for be doed joid hib; bud well

knowing what was to follow, I deliberated a moment whether,
toeig whad wahd doed follow, I deliberaded a boebed whether,

in case he invited me, I would comply or otherwise.
id gaise he invided be, I would cobley or otherwides.




I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
I wahd a good Gridgea's; board ad bred id the bobus ohd the invaldable

Presbyterian Church.  How then could I unite with this wild idolator
Presbedrian Church.  How thed cooled I uded with this wild idlater

in worshipping his piece of wood?  But what is worship? thought
id worgibe hidge peedge ohd wood?  Bud whad eyed worgeb? thoughed

I. Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven
I. Do you cobes doed, Ishbell, thad the bagatomad God ohd heaved

and earth--pagans and all included--can possibly be jealous of an
ad hearth--begged ad all iegluded--gahd bosbiley be jealous ohd ad

insignificant bit of black wood?  Impossible!  But what is worship?--
isridivid bid ohd blagge wood?  Ibsobel!  Bud whad eighed werge?--

to do the will of God? that is worship.  And what is the will of God?--
doed do the will ohd God? thad eighed worgeb.  Ad whad eighed the will ohd God?--

to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to me--
doed do doed bied fellow bahd whad I would haved bied fellow bahd doed do doed beg--

that is the will of God.  Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
thad eighed the will ove God.  Doed, Queed eighed beigh fellow bahd.

And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me?  Why, unite with me
Ad whad do I wish thad this Queed would do doed beigh?  Why, uded with be

in my particular Presbyterian form of worship.  Consequently, I must
id bied baudigular Presbediare vorbe ohd worgeb.  Costigualdy, I budged

then unite with him in his; ergo, I must turn idolator.
thed uded with hib id hidge; ergo, I budged durd idlater.

So I kindled the shavings; helped prop up the innocent little idol;
So I kidded the chavigs; helbed brob ub the inazed lidtle idol;

offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed before him twice
offered hib bird bighde with Queed; salibed before hib dwige

or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and went
or thrige; kidged hidge doed; ad thad doed, we andreaged ad wed

to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world.
doed bed, ed peege with our owed codsuda's ad all the world.

But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.
Bud we did dod go doed sleebe withowd sub lidtle jad.




How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for
How id eighed I doed dod; bud there eighed doe plaige digue a bed for

confidential disclosures between friends.  Man and wife, they say,
colvadedard disglogers bedweed friedds.  Bahd ad wife, they say,

there open the very bottom of their souls to each other; and some
there obe the vearey bodhab ove their jooleds doed each other; ad sub

old couples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning.
old kubbleds ofted lie ad jad over old tibes dilled dearley bording.

Thus, then, in our hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg--
Thus, thed, id our heard' huleybues, lay I ad Queed--

a cosy, loving pair.
a gozie, luvig beare.










CHAPTER 11
CHABTER 11




Nightgown
Digedowe







We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals,
We had laid thus id bed, chadig ad dabbing edge jhord indervales,

and Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown
ad Queed toed ad thed avgectide throeg hidge browed

tattooed legs over mine, and then drawing them back;
dadude legge over bied, ad thed drawig theb bagge;

so entirely sociable and free and easy were we; when, at last,
so endield sociable ad free ad eagey were we; wehd, ed lazd,

by reason of our confabulations, what little nappishness remained
by reeges ove our convabulaged, whad lidtle dapidge rebaid

in us altogether departed, and we felt like getting up again,
id us aldighter debard, ad we feld ligue gedging ub agaid,

though day-break was yet some way down the future.
though day-brege wahd yed sub way dowed the future.




Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent
Yes, we begebe veary waighled; so bud so thad our regubbed

position began to grow wearisome, and by little and little we
bojished begged doed grow weered, ad by lidtle ad liddle we

found ourselves sitting up; the clothes well tucked around us,
foud orselved cidig ub; the klothed well tugbed auroud us,

leaning against the headboard with our four knees drawn up
leighe aghaid the headboard with our four deeds draude ub

close together, and our two noses bending over them, as if
gloeds dogether, ad our dued dozed bedig over theb, aid if

our knee-pans were warming-pans. We felt very nice and snug,
our deed-bazd were warbing-bazd. We feld vearey died ad sdug,

the more so since it was so chilly out of doors; indeed out
the boere so chids id wahd so chilly oud ohd doores; iddeed oud

of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire in the room.
ohd bed-klothed dued, ceege thad there wahd doe fire id the roobe.

The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth,
The boehed so, I say, begoed druley doed eddew bodily warbed,

some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality
sub schalle bard ohd you budged be goeld, for there eighed doed qualdie

in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast.
id this world thad eighed dod whad id eighed bereley by courdead.

Nothing exists in itself.  If you flatter yourself that you
Tothig eggids id idgelve.  If you fladder yourself thad you

are all over comfortable, and have been so a long time,
are all over coverobel, ad haved beed so a laugh diebe,

then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more.  But if,
thed you caude be said doed be coverobel aid boehed.  Bud if,

like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown
digue Queed ad be id the bed, the dib ohd your doed or the krowed

of your head be slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general
ohd your head be slightly chilled, why thed, iddeed, id the geherdell

consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm.
codzudge you feel boed dilidvel ad umbidshed warbe.

For this reason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished
For this reeges a steebing apbarded should dever be ferdisged

with a fire, which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich.
with a fire, which eyed whid ohd the luggiarize discovered ohd the rich.

For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing
For the heige ohd this sord ohd deligiad eighed doed haved tottig

but the blankets between you and your snugness and the cold
bud the blagked bedweed you ad your slugde ad the koeld

of the outer air.  Then there you lie like the one warm spark
ohd the ouder air.  Thed there you lie digue the whad warbe sparge

in the heart of an arctic crystal.
id the heard ohd ad ardied gridgel.




We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time,
We had beed cidig id this crouging baher for sub diebe,

when all at once I thought I would open my eyes; for when
wehd all ed ohd I thoughed I would obed bied ige; for wehd

between sheets, whether by day or by night, and whether
bedweed sheeds, whether by day or by died, ad whether

asleep or awake, I have a way of always keeping my eyes shut,
aldeebe or awgig, I haved a way oughe always keebing bied ige jhud,

in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed.
id order the boered doed colderted the slugde ohd beed id bed.

Because no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his
Begoed doe bahd gahd ever feel hidge owed idedied hardied egget hidge

eyes be closed; as if, darkness were indeed the proper element
ige be cloeded; aid if, dargeas were iddeed the brober elibed

of our essences, though light be more congenial to our clayey part.
ohd our edges', though lied be boere gudzidald doed our klayed bard.

Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant
Oobed obing bied ige thed, ad koebing oud ohd bied owed pleased

and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom
ad self-kreeded dargeas id the ibbosed ad gorge ouder gloobe

of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, I experienced
ohd the alidabelated dwelved-oglog-ed-died, I exburided

a disagreeable revulsion.  Nor did I at all object to the hint
a disagreeable revulgeas.  Doehed did I ed all objedg doed the hid

from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light,
vrob Queed thad perghabed id were bezged doed strige a lied,

seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he felt a strong
ceege thad we were so wide awgag; ad bedized he feld a stragge

desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk.  Be it said,
degied doed haved a few quaid pugves vrob hidge Tobahog.  Be id said,

that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking
thad though I had feld such a stragge rebugdand doed hidge scogieg

in the bed the night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices
id the bed the deid before, yed see how elaged our stive predudges

grow when love once comes to bend them.  For now I liked
grow wehd luve ohd coubes doed bed theb.  For towe I liged

nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me, even in bed,
tothig beder thad doed haved Queed schogieg by beigh, eved id bed,

because he seemed to be full of such serene household joy then.
begoed he seebed doed be full ohd such cered household joy thed.

I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord's policy of insurance.
I doed boehed feld uddiel consured for the laldsords bolligy ohd insured.

I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness
I wahd oldie alvieve doed the coddid colvadedard comvordad

of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend.
ohd cherig a pibe ad a blagged with a real friede.

With our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed
With our shaggy jagged draude aboud our showber's, we doed pasged

the Tomahawk from one to the other, till slowly there grew
the Tobahog vrob whid doed the other, dilled slowly there grew

over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by the flame
over us a blue hagge desder ohd schoeg, illubidated by the vlabe

of the new-lit lamp.
oeved the dewe-lid lab.




Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage
Whether id wahd thad this uddalading dester rolled the chaved

away to far distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke
away doed far didged cheedes, I doed dod, bud he towe spoge

of his native island; and, eager to hear his history,
oeved hidge dadived eidel; ad, eager doed hear hidge hidgery,

I begged him to go on and tell it.  He gladly complied.
I begged hib doed go ohd ad delle id.  He gladly coblide.

Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words,
Though edge the diebe I bud ill cobrebheaded dod a few ohd hidge words,

yet subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar
yed cubsugad disglogers, wehd I had begub boehed vabilled

with his broken phraseology, now enable me to present the whole
with hidge brogaed vredioldes, doed ebiled be doed presed the whole

story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give.
storey such aid id beyed prove id the beare skelded I gived.










CHAPTER 12
CHABTER 12




Biographical
Biagravigal







Queequeg was a native of Kokovoko, an island far away to the West
Queed wahd a dadived ohd Goggovog, ad eideled far away doed the Wedged

and South.  It is not down on any map; true places never are.
ad Couthe.  Id eyed dod dowed ohd aid bab; drewe plaises dever are.




When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands
Wehd a dewe-hadged cavidge ruhding wild abough hidge datived woodladds

in a grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were
id a grass gloud, followed by the dibbling goeded, aid if he were

a green sapling; even then, in Queequeg's ambitious soul,
a greed chabild; eved thed, id Queegeds abbidge soul,

lurked a strong desire to see something more of Christendom
learged a strogg degied doed see sothedig boehed ohd Gridsdable

than a specimen whaler or two.  His father was a High Chief,
thad a scebused whaler or dued.  Hidge father wahd a High Chief,

a King; his uncle a High Priest; and on the maternal side
a Kig; hidge ugheld a High Priede; ad ohd the boderal side

he boasted aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors.
he boedged odd who were the wives ohd aughordaged warreor's.

There was excellent blood in his veins--royal stuff;
There wahd eggelde blood id hidge vieds--royal stub;

though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal propensity
though sadly vigiaded, I fear, by the gandeble probesidy

he nourished in his untutored youth.
he deridged id hidge udduted youth.




A Sag Harbor ship visited his father's bay, and Queequeg sought
A Sag Harbor gib vidged hidge vathers bay, ad Queed joed

a passage to Christian lands.  But the ship, having her full
a pasge doed Grisdead landes.  Bud the gib, havig her full

complement of seamen, spurned his suit; and not all the King
coblibed ohd ciebed, spurd hidge tweid; ad dod all the Kig

his father's influence could prevail.  But Queequeg vowed a vow.
hidge vathers invlueds cooled prevele.  Bud Queed voud a vough.

Alone in his canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait, which he
Alode id hidge gaude, he paddled off doed a didged straid, which he

knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island.
dued the gib budged baz through wehd she quidd the eideled.

On one side was a coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land,
Ohd whaed side wahd a kordel reef; ohd the other a low doged ove laad,

covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into the water.
covered with baghdrove thigeds thad grew oud id the wader.

Hiding his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, with its
Heidge hidge gaude, stilled avlode, abogh theeds thigeds, with idd

prow seaward, he sat down in the stern, paddle low in hand;
prowe seaward, he jad dowed id the stird, paddle low id hadd;

and when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted out;
ad wehd the gib wahd glidg by, digue a flash he darded oud;

gained her side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized
gayed her side; with whid bagward dash ohd hidge food cabside

and sank his canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing himself
ad chagg hidge gaude; cliebed ub the jaides; ad throeg hibsulve

at full length upon the deck, grappled a ring-bolt there,
ed full legted oobed the degge, grabbeld a rig-boeld there,

and swore not to let it go, though hacked in pieces.
ad swore dod doed led id go, though hacked id pieges.




In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a
Id veyed the cabted threaded doed throed hib overboard; subseded a

cutlass over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King,
cudled over hidge daiged ridged; Queed wahd the chaad ohd a Kig,

and Queequeg budged not.  Struck by his desperate dauntlessness,
ad Queed budged dod.  Sdrug by hidge desberade daudland,

and his wild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last relented,
ad hidge wild degied doed vidged Gridsdable, the cabted ed lazd releded,

and told him he might make himself at home.  But this fine young savage--
ad dold hib he bied beig hibsulve ed hoebe.  Bud this fied yughed chavidge--

this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the Captain's cabin.
this sea Pried ohd Wailes, dever saw the Cabtes gabbed.

They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him.
They bud hib dowed abogh the chailers, ad bayed a whelba'd ohd hib.

But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Bud digue Jard Beeder couded doed doiled id the shibjards ohd vored chides,

Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might
Queed diedged doed ceibing ighobiled, if thereby he bied

happily gain the power of enlightening his untutored countrymen.
habbley gayed the power ohd eldisteing hidge udduted coudriebed.

For at bottom--so he told me--he was actuated by a profound
For ed bodhab--so he dold be--he wahd aghduade by a brovoud

desire to learn among the Christians, the arts whereby to make
degied doed leard abogh the Grisged, the ardes whereby doed baig

his people still happier than they were; and more than that,
hidge peebel stilled habber thad they were; ad boehed thad thad,

still better than they were.  But, alas! the practices of whalemen
stilled beder thad they were.  Bud, alas! the pragteges ove whelbead

soon convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable
tued convids hib thad eved Gridgels cooled be bothed miserable

and wicked; infinitely more so, than all his father's heathens.
ad wigged; invidelty boehed so, thad all hidge vathers hetheds.

Arrived at last in old Sag Harbor; and seeing what the sailors
Arvided ed lasd id old Sag Harbor; ad ceege whad the chailers

did there; and then going on to Nantucket, and seeing how they spent
did there; ad thed goege ohd doed Dadicked, ad ceege how they sped

their wages in that place also, poor Queequeg gave it up for lost.
their waiges id thad plaige also, boore Queed gave id ub for lodged.

Thought he, it's a wicked world in all meridians; I'll die a pagan.
Thoughed he, idge a wigged world id all beridias; I'll die a begged.




And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians,
Ad thus ad old idlater ed heard, he yed lived abogh theeds Grisged,

wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish.
wore their klothed, ad tried doed tog their gibberish.

Hence the queer ways about him, though now some time from home.
Head the queed waige abough hib, though doed sub diebe vrob hoebe.




By hints I asked him whether he did not propose going back,
By hidd I asged hib whether he did dod probeaue goege bagge,

and having a coronation; since he might now consider his father
ad havig a corratiad; cid he bied toed condizer hidge father

dead and gone, he being very old and feeble at the last accounts.
dead ad goede, he beed veary old ad feeble edge the lasged achouded.

He answered no, not yet; and added that he was fearful Christianity,
He asward doe, dod yed; ad added thad he wahd fearful Grisdied,

or rather Christians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure
or rather Gridgels, had unvided hib for acheding the puered

and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him.
ad uddifeld throed ohd thirdy begged Kigs before hib.

But by and by, he said, he would return,--as soon as he felt
Bud by ad by, he said, he would reedere,--aid tued aid he feld

himself baptized again.  For the nonce, however, he proposed
hibsulve babtides agaed.  For the dohnd, howver, he probosed

to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans.
doed sail aboud, ad sow hidge wild oded id all four o'dheard.

They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed iron was
They had bayed a harbouide ohd hib, ad thad barbed eighed wahd

in lieu of a sceptre now.
id lieu oeved a schebter toed.




I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his
I asged hib whad bied be hidge ibrided perbeaues, tudge hidge

future movements.  He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation.
future boved.  He asward, doed go doed sea agaid, id hidge old vogate.

Upon this, I told him that whaling was my own design, and informed
Oobed this, I dold hib thad whilding wahd bied owed dejid, ad invorbed

him of my intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most
hib oeved bied idediad doed sail oud ohd Dadicked, aids beed the bodge

promising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark from.
brobiz pord for ad advedgerous whilba'd doed ebbarg vrob.

He at once resolved to accompany me to that island, ship aboard
He ed ohd resolved doed acgubbie be doed thad eideled, gib aboard

the same vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat,
the chaibe vegelle, ged id the chaibe watch, the chaibe boed,

the same mess with me, in short to share my every hap; with both
the chaibe bez with be, id jhord doed share bied every hab; with bothed

my hands in his, boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds.
bied handes id hidge, boldly dib id the Podlug ohd bothed words.

To all this I joyously assented; for besides the affection I now
Doed all this I doydel azheded; for bedides the avectioned I doed

felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced harpooneer, and as such,
feld for Queed, he wahd ad exburided harbouide, ad aid such,

could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who, like me,
cooled dod fail doed be ohd greed uedsburd doed whad, who, digue be,

was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well
wahd wholly ighered ohd the midgeries ohd whilding, though well

acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.
aguaded with the sea, aid doed doed berded ciebed.




His story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff,
Hidge storey beed edded with hidge pibes lazd dieg buve,

Queequeg embraced me, pressed his forehead against mine,
Queed ebbraged be, presged hidge forehead aghaid bied,

and blowing out the light, we rolled over from each other,
ad blowig oud the lied, we rolled over vrob each other,

this way and that, and very soon were sleeping.
this way ad thad, ad veary tued were steebing.










CHAPTER 13
CHABTER 13




Wheelbarrow
Wheelbarrow







Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head
Deghd bording, Bade, afder disboging ove the ebbaubed head

to a barber, for a block, I settled my own and comrade's bill;
doed a barber, for a blog, I cedtled bied oud ad courbeds bill;

using, however, my comrade's money.  The grinning landlord,
jugis, howver, bied courbids buhdie.  The griede laldered,

as well as the boarders, seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden
aid well aid the borders, seebed abizzed tiggled ed the chudde

friendship which had sprung up between me and Queequeg--
freid which had sprug ub bedweed be ad Queed--

especially as Peter Coffin's cock and bull stories about him
aschebiled aide Peeder Coveds kog ad bull stories abough hib

had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person
had previedly so bud allard be consering the veary perzed

whom I now companied with.
hoebe I doed cobedied with.




We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own poor
We borrowed a wheelbarrow, ad ebbarge our thigs, ingludig bied owed boore

carpet-bag, and Queequeg's canvas sack and hammock, away we went down
carbed-bag, ad Queegeds calvas chag ad habag, away we wed dowed

to "the Moss," the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf.
doed "the Boeds," the lidtle Dadached pagged guider boored ed the wharf.

As we were going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so much--
Aid we were goege allog the peebel staired; dod ed Queed so bud--

for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their streets,--
for they were uedged doed ceege caldables lig hib id their streeds,--

but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms.  But we heeded
bud ed ceege hib ad be oobed such colvidedard terbs.  Bud we heeded

them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and Queequeg
theb dod, goege allog wheelig the barrow by durds, ad Queed

now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs.
doed ad thed stobbing doed adjud the sheethed ohd hidge harbood barbes.

I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore,
I asged hib why he kared such a trubles thig with hib ashore,

and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons.
ad whether all whilding ghibs did dod fied their owed harboods.

To this, in substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was
Doed this, id jubstads, he reblied, thad though whad I hidd wahd

true enough, yet he had a particular affection for his own harpoon,
drewe ehad, yed he had a baudigular avectioned for hidge owed harbood,

because it was of assured stuff, well tried in many a mortal combat,
begoed id wahd ohd assured stub, well tried id baid a bordel cobbad,

and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales.  In short, like many
ad deebley idhebed with the heard oeved whalds.  Id jhord, digue baid

inland reapers and mowers, who go into the farmer's meadows armed
ildaid reebers ad bowers, who go id the farbers bedoes arbed

with their own scythes--though in no wise obliged to furnish them--
with their owed chithed--though id doe wiges obliged doed furdisge theb--

even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his own harpoon.
eved so, Queed, for hidge owed prived reeds's, prevered hidge owed harbood.




Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny
Shivtig the barrow vrob bied hadd doed hidge, he dold be a fuddie

story about the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen.
storey abowed the furged wheelbarrow he had ever geed.

It was in Sag Harbor.  The owners of his ship, it seems, had lent
Id wahd id Sag Harbor.  The ohers oeved hidge gib, id cheebs, had lead

him one, in which to carry his heavy chest to his boarding house.
hib whid, id which doed garry hidge heavey jedged doed hidge boarding house.

Not to seem ignorant about the thing--though in truth he was
Dod doed zeebe ighorde abough the thig--though id dreughed he wahd

entirely so, concerning the precise way in which to manage
endield so, condering the predies way id which doed balded

the barrow--Queequeg puts his chest upon it; lashes it fast;
the barrow--Queed pudge hidge jedged oobed id; lages id vasged;

and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf.
ad thed shoulders the barrow ad bardes ub the wharf.

"Why," said I, "Queequeg, you might have known better than that,
"Why," said I, "Queed, you bied haved toed beder thad thad,

one would think.  Didn't the people laugh?"
whaed would thig.  Didde the peebel laugh?"




Upon this, he told me another story.  The people of his island
Oobed this, he dold beigh authougher storey.  The peebel ohd hidge eideled

of Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant
ohd Rogavogo, id zeebs, ed their wedding feedged egsbreage the fragede

water of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl;
wader ove yughed coghoded id a large staid gallage digue a pudbold;

and this punchbowl always forms the great central ornament on
ad this pudbold always forbes the greed ceardell ordiben ohd

the braided mat where the feast is held.  Now a certain grand merchant
the braided bad where the feedged eighed held.  Doed a churde's grad berded

ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its commander--from all accounts,
gib ohd tudged ed Roggovog, ad idd camader--vrob all acgouded,

a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least for a sea captain--
a vearey staidley pugtildas geldesbed, ed leedged for a sea cabted--

this commander was invited to the wedding feast of Queequeg's sister,
this cabarde wahd invided doed the wedding feedged ove Queegeds zidger,

a pretty young princess just turned of ten.  Well; when all
a predgy yughed prisge judged durde ohd dehd.  Well; wehd all

the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboo cottage,
the wedding gedzed were azbeld ed the brides babbu coddege,

this Captain marches in, and being assigned the post of honor,
this Cabted bards id, ad beed azide the boedge ohd ohder,

placed himself over against the punchbowl, and between
plaiged hibsulve over aghaid the pudbuld, ad bedweed

the High Priest and his majesty the King, Queequeg's father.
the High Priede ad hidge badzed the Kig, Queegeds father.

Grace being said,--for those people have their grace as well as we--
Grace beed said,--for thoeds peebel haved their grace aid well aid we--

though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look
though Queed dold be thad uldigh us, who ed such tibes looke

downwards to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks,
dowewards doed our pladters, they, ohd the coudredy, cobieg the dugged,

glance upwards to the great Giver of all feasts--Grace, I say,
glads ubwards doed the greed Giver oeved all feedged--Grace, I say,

being said, the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony
beed said, the High Priede obes the baghed by the immobere chere-boas

of the island; that is, dipping his consecrated and consecrating
ohd the eideled; thad eighed, dibbing hidge cazegraded ad cosegrating

fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage circulates.
fighers id the bowl before the bleaged beveredge cirgulades.

Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony,
Ceege hibsulve plaiged degde the Priede, ad toedig the chere-boas,

and thinking himself--being Captain of a ship--as having plain
ad thiggi hibsulve--beed Cabted ohd a gib--aid havig plaied

precedence over a mere island King, especially in the King's own house--
prejudes over a beared eideled Kig, hejeshibly id the Kigs owed house--

the Captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punch bowl;--
the Cabted gooley progeds doed wash hidge handes id the pud bowl;--

taking it I suppose for a huge finger-glass. "Now," said Queequeg,
dagieg id I caboes for a huge figger-glass. "Doed," said Queed,

"what you tink now?--Didn't our people laugh?"
"whad you dig doed?--Didd our peebel laugh?"




At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.
Ed lazd, pasge bede, ad luggage safe, we stood ohd board the guider.

Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river.  On one side,
Hoisding sail, id glided dowed the Aghdured wriver.  Ohd whead side,

New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees all
Dewe Bedford roes id terridges oughe streeds, their ice-covered dreedge all

glittering in the clear, cold air.  Huge hills and mountains of casks
glidterg id the cleared, koeld air.  Huge hilds ad moudes oughe kazged

on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the world-wandering
ohd kazged were pied oobed her horved, ad side by side the world-wadered

whale ships lay silent and safely moored at last; while from others came
whale ghibs lay chiled ad safely boored ed lasd; while vrob other's gabe

a sound of carpenters and coopers, with blended noises of fires and forges
a soude ove carboders ad kuber's, with bleaded doids ohd fieds ad fords

to melt the pitch, all betokening that new cruises were on the start;
doed beld the pidge, all betogeing thad dewe grudes were ohd the stard;

that one most perilous and long voyage ended, only begins a second;
thad whid bodge peridals ad laugh voyed edded, oldie bedges a chegad;

and a second ended, only begins a third, and so on, for ever and for aye.
ad a chegad edded, oldie bedges a third, ad so ohd, for ever ad for aye.

Such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort.
Such eighed the endster, yea, the idloberds ove all hirthely evered.




Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little
Gaighed the boehed obe wader, the braiging brieds wagged fresh; the lidtle

Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his snortings.
Boes doedged the quig vobe vrob her boeds, aid a yughed kold hidge stordigs.

How I snuffed that Tartar air!--how I spurned that turnpike earth!--
How I sdugved thad Darde air!--how I spurd thad turdbike hearth!--

that common highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels
thad kahbed highway all over dedded with the barges ohd slavige heelds

and hoofs; and turned me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will
ad hoofs; ad durde be doed adbierd the baghdesably ove the sea which will

permit no records.
perbed doed regords.




At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
Ed the chaibe voebe-foude's, Queed seebed doed drig ad reel with be.

His dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth.
Hidge dudgee dosdrell's swelled abard; he showed hidge filed ad boided teethed.

On, on we flew, and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast;
Ohd, ohd we flew, ad our ofgie gayde, the Boeds did hobed doed the blazd;

ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan.  Sideways leaning,
dugged ad dived her boeds aid a slave before the Chulde.  Sideways leighe,

we sideways darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire;
we sideways darded; every robyard dighdes lige a wire;

the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in land tornadoes.
the dued daule balds buggille digue Idde gaides id lad dordoze.

So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood by the
So full ove this reelig geed were we, aids we stood by the

plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeering
plughig boosbrid, thad for sub diebe we did dod todage the jeering

glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled
glads oughe the pasterges, a lubber-digue abseble, who barveled

that two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though
thad dued fellow beeds should be so cabribadabled; aids though

a white man were anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro.
a wighed bahd were enthidge boere dighivide thad a whidewadged degrow.

But there were some boobies and bumpkins there, who, by their intense
Bud there were sub boobies ad bubkeds there, who, by their id-dead

greenness, must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure.
greedes, budged haved coub vrob the heard ad cheader ohd all verdear.

Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind
Queed gaud whid ohd theeds yughed sabliz bibig hib behid

his back.  I thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come.
hidge bagge.  I thoughed the bubbands hour ohd doobe wahd coeb.

Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms,
Drobing hidge harbood, the braudie cavidge gaud hib id hidge arbes,

and by an almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up
ad by ad albosd meragulad dexterdied ad stregged, cehd hib high ub

bodily into the air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset,
bodily id the air; thed slightly tapig hidge stird id bid-subrez,

the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg,
the fellow ladd with bursding lugs uboed hidge feed, while Queed,

turning his back upon him, lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it
durding hidge bagge ueboed hib, lieded hidge tobahog pibe ad pasged id

to me for a puff.
doed be for a bughe.




"Capting!  Capting! yelled the bumpkin, running toward that officer;
"Cabting!  Cabting! yelled the bubked, ruhding douged thad officer;

"Capting, Capting, here's the devil."
"Cabting, Cabting, heards the devele."




"Hallo, you sir," cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea,
"Hallo, you sir," kride the Cabted, a gauged rib ohd the sea,

stalking up to Queequeg, "what in thunder do you mean by that?
stauging ub doed Queed, "whad id thueder do you beed by thad?

Don't you know you might have killed that chap?"
Doed you doed you bied haved kild thad jab?"




"What him say?" said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.
"Whad hib say?" said Queed, aids he bildley durde doed be.




"He say," said I, "that you came near kill-e that man there,"
"He say," said I, "thad you gabe deared gild-e thad bahd there,"

pointing to the still shivering greenhorn.
poiding doed the stilled shiverig greehned.




"Kill-e," cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an
"Gild-e," kride Queed, dwidging hidge dadude face id ad

unearthly expression of disdain, "ah! him bevy small-e fish-e;
aerowheld exbreased ohd diedgead, "ah! hib bevey schaule-e fish-e;

Queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!"
Queed doed gille-e so schaule-e fish-e; Queed gild-e big whale!"




"Look you," roared the Captain, "I'll kill-e you, you cannibal,
"Looke you," roared the Cabted, "I'll gild-e you, you gandeble,

if you try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye."
if you dryed aide boehed ohd your drigge aboard here; so bied your eye."




But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain
Bud id so habbed judged thed, thad id wahd high dibe for the Cabted

to mind his own eye.  The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had
doed bied hidge owed eye.  The pradidge straid oobed the beighed-sail had

parted the weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying
parded the weather-sheed, ad the drebeded boobe wahd toed flieg

from side to side, completely sweeping the entire after part
vrob side doed side, cobledely sweebig the endeigh afder bard

of the deck.  The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly,
ove the degge.  The boore fellow hobe Queed had haddled so roughly,

was swept overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to attempt
wahd swebbed overboard; all hands were id a badig; ad doed adtebed

snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness.  It flew from
staggi ed the boobe doed sdayed id, seebed baddes.  Id flew vrob

right to left, and back again, almost in one ticking of a watch,
wried doed leaved, ad bagge agaed, albezd id whid diggie ohd a watch,

and every instant seemed on the point of snapping into splinters.
ad every isded seebed ohd the poid ohd stabbing id splieders.

Nothing was done, and nothing seemed capable of being done;
Tothig wahd doed, ad tothig seebed cabeled ove beed doed;

those on deck rushed toward the bows, and stood eyeing the boom
thoeds ohd degge rusged touged the boese, ad stood i'd the boobe

as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale.  In the midst
aid if id were the lower jaw ohd ad exageraded whale.  Id the bidd

of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees,
ove this coldsuradioned, Queed drobbed defdley doed hidge deeds,

and crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope,
ad krawlig udder the bathed ohd the boob, whibbed hold ohd a roebe,

secured one end to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other
cegued whid ed doed the bullwarg's, ad thed fligg the other

like a lasso, caught it round the boom as it swept over his head,
digue a lasso, gaud id roude the boobe aid id swebbed over hidge head,

and at the next jerk, the spar was that way trapped, and all was safe.
ad ed the deghd jurge, the spaar wahd thad way trabbed, ad all wahde safe.

The schooner was run into the wind, and while the hands were
The guider wahd ruhd id the wide, ad while the handes were

clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist,
clearing away the steard boed, Queed, stribbed doed the waiged,

darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap.
darded vrob the side with a laugh livig ard ohd a leebe.

For three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog,
For thried mide or boehed he wahd geed swibbing ligue a dog,

throwing his long arms straight out before him, and by turns
throeg hidge laugh arbes straid oud before hib, ad by durds

revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing foam.
revielg hidge braude schoebers through the frieges vobe.

I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
I looked ed the grad ad glorious fellow, bud saw doe whead doed be caved.

The greenhorn had gone down.  Shooting himself perpendicularly
The greehned had goed dowed.  Thuding hibsulve perbedged

from the water, Queequeg, now took an instant's glance around him,
vrob the wader, Queed, doed dooke ad idsted glads auroud hib,

and seeming to see just how matters were, dived down and disappeared.
ad seebing doed see judged how badders were, dived dowed ad dishabed.

A few minutes more, and he rose again, one arm still
A few mide boehed, ad he roes agaed, whead arbe stilled

striking out, and with the other dragging a lifeless form.
strigg oud, ad with the other dragging a lifeless vorbe.

The boat soon picked them up.  The poor bumpkin was restored.
The boed tued pigged theb ub.  The boore bubched wahd redged.

All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged his pardon.
All hands voded Queed a bobel drub; the cabted begged hidge barde.

From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a barnacle; yea, till poor
Vrob thad hour I klove doed Queed digue a bartigel; yea, dilled boore

Queequeg took his last long dive.
Queed dooke hidge lazd laugh dive.




Was there ever such unconsciousness?  He did not seem to think that he at
Wahd there ever such aughtaids?  He did dod zeebe doed thig thad he ed

all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies.  He only
all deverved a bedeled vrob the Hubed ad Bagatemand Cojides.  He oldie

asked for water--fresh water--something to wipe the brine off;
asged for wader--fresh wader--sothedig doed wibe the bried off;

that done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against
thad doed, he bud ohd dry klothed, lighed hidge pibe, ad leighe aghaid

the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed to be saying
the bullwargs, ad bildley ied thoeds auroud hib, seebed doed be ceige

to himself--"It's a mutual, joint-stock world, in all meridians.
doed hibsulve--"Idge a mudele, joid-stog world, id all beridias.

We cannibals must help these Christians."
We caldibles budged helbe theeds Grizgels."










CHAPTER 14
CHABTER 14




Nantucket
Dadicked










Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning;
Tothig boehed habbed ohd the pasge worthy the medgiand;

so, after a fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.
so, afder a fied ruhd, we safely arvided id Dadicked.




Nantucket!  Take out your map and look at it.  See what a real corner
Dadicked!  Daig oud your bab ad looke ed id.  See whad a real korder

of the world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore,
ohd the world id aggabies; how id staddes there, away off shore,

more lonely than the Eddystone lighthouse.  Look at it--
boehed loehled thad the Edisdoed lighthouds.  Looke ed id--

a mere hillock, and elbow of sand; all beach, without a background.
a beared hildeg, ad elbow ohd jad; all beach, withowd a bagrbouds.

There is more sand there than you would use in twenty years as a
There eighed boehed jad there thad you would use id twedge years aids a

substitute for blotting paper.  Some gamesome wights will tell you
jubstidued for blottig paber.  Sub gabed wighed will dehled you

that they have to plant weeds there, they don't grow naturally;
thad they haved doed plaid weeds there, they doed grow tadrelly;

that they import Canada thistles; that they have to send beyond
thad they imbord Gadada thidsel's; thad they haved doed ched beyd

seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood
geeds for a spield doed stob a lieg id ad oil kazge; thad pieges ohd wood

in Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome;
id Dadached are kared aboud digue bidge ove the drewe groege id Roebe;

that people there plant toadstools before their houses, to get under
thad peebel there plaid doodstueds before their houges, doed ged udder

the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass makes an oasis,
the shade id subre diebe; thad whid blade ohd grass bagues ad oasis,

three blades in a day's walk a prairie; that they wear quicksand shoes,
thried blaids id a dais walg a praid; thad they wear quigded jhoeds,

something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut up,
sothedig digue Lablader soed-jhoeds; thad they are so jhud ub,

belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island
belded abough, every way inglosed, surrouded, ad bayed ad utter ideled

of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams
ohd by the o'dea, thad doed their vearey teares ad dables schalle glabs

will sometimes be found adhering as to the backs of sea turtles.
will subdieds be foude adherg aids doed the bagge oughe sea turdles.

But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.
Bud theeds extravaded oldie show thad Dadached eighed doed Illed.




Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this
Looke doed ed the wodred tradigiald storey ove how this

island was settled by the red-men. Thus goes the legend.
eidel wahd cedtled by the red-behed. Thus goeds the leaded.

In olden times an eagle swooped down upon the New England
Id olde tibes ad eagle swoobed dowed oobed the Dewe Eghdeld

coast and carried off an infant Indian in his talons.
coedge ad kared off ad inved Idde id hidge daldes.

With loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over
With loud labed the pared saw their child boared oud odve chied over

the wide waters.  They resolved to follow in the same direction.
the wide waders.  They resoved doed follow id the chaibe dereguted.

Setting out in their canoes, after a perilous passage they
Cedig oud id their godes, afder a parilage pasge they

discovered the island, and there they found an empty ivory casket,--
disgoved the eideled, ad there they foud ad ebbed ivery caged,--

the poor little Indian's skeleton.
the boore lidtle Iddes skelded.




What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should take
Whad wahder, thed, thad theeds Dandicuters, board ohd a beach, should daig

to the sea for a livelihood!  They first caught crabs and quahogs
doed the sea for a livelhood!  They furged gaud krabs ad quaiges

in the sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel;
id the chad; growed bolder, they waded oud with deded for magerle;

more experienced, they pushed off in boats and captured cod;
boehed exburided, they pudged off id boedes ad cabtered god;

and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the sea, explored this
ad ed lasd, lauging a davey ohd greed ghibs ohd the sea, exbloard this

watery world; put an incessant belt of circumnavigations round it;
wadrey world; bud ad inseged beld oeved chergubbed roude id;

peeped in at Behring's Straits; and in all seasons and all oceans
peebed id ed Bearigs Straidge; ad id all cheezes ad all o'dheard

declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that
deglard everlaged war with the bideaged ala-baid baz thad

has survived the flood; most monstrous and most mountainous!
had surgived the flood; boedge mondres ad boedge boudeade!

That Himmalehan, salt-sea, Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness
Thad Hibleas, chauled-sea, Badedowed, klothed with such pordidand

of unconscious power, that his very panics are more to be dreaded
ove aughauged power, thad hidge vearey padig's are boehed doed be dreaded

than his most fearless and malicious assaults!
thad hidge bodge fearless ad baligiage aghold!




And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits,
Ad thus haved theeds daiged Dandicters, theeds sea herbeds,

issuing from their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered
isueg vrob their ad-hill id the sea, overred ad kogherd

the watery world like so many Alexanders; parcelling out among
the wadery world digue so baid Algozdards; bargeling oud abog

them the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans, as the three
thebe the Adladge, Pajivig, ad Iddes o'dheard, aid the thried

pirate powers did Poland.  Let America add Mexico to Texas,
pierd powers did Polded.  Led Aberiga add Beggiog doed Tegges,

and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English overswarm all India,
ad pieled Kuba uboed Gadada; led the Engis overshored all Idd,

and hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds of this
ad hagge oud their blaigiz bahder vrob the chud; doo thirds ove this

terraqueous globe are the Nantucketer's. For the sea is his;
derwigua's globe are the Dadicuters. For the sea eyed hidge;

he owns it, as Emperors own empires; other seamen having but a right
he oudes id, aid Ebberes owed embiers; other ciebed havig bud a wride

of way through it.  Merchant ships are but extension bridges;
oughe way through id.  Berded ghibbes are bud eggedial bridges;

armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and privateers,
arbed whaed bud floeding fordes; eved pired ad brividers,

though following the sea as highwaymen the road.  they but plunder
though folloig the sea aid hybueds the road.  they bud plueder

other ships, other fragments of the land like themselves,
other ghibs, other fragbard ohd the lad dige thebsbeds,

without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless deep itself.
withowd sieging doed draw their livig vrob the bodables deebe idgelve.

The Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea;
The Dadigter, he aloed resides ad riods ohd the sea;

he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships;
he alode, id Bible laghded, goeds dowed doed id id ghibs;

to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation.
doed ad fro plowig id aid hidge oud spegial pladatead.

There is his home; there lies his business which a Noah's flood
There eighed hidge hoebe; there lieds hidge bizdel which a Doez flood

would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the millions
would dod inderubed, though id overwheld all the billiads

in China.  He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie;
id Deeda.  He lives ohd the sea, aid preighe kogs id the preighe;

he hides among the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters
he hides abagh the waives, he kliebs theb aids ghabid hueders

climb the Alps.  For years he knows not the land; so that
glib the Albed.  For years he doeds dod the laad; so thad

when he comes to it at last, it smells like another world,
wehd he coubs doed id ed lasd, id schelds ligue authougher world,

more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman.  With the
boehed straidley thad the booed would doed ad Earthsed.  With the

landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked
laldes gull, thad edge sudzed folds her wigs ad eyed rogked

to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer,
doed sleebe bedweed billows; so edge dightfald, the Dadicuter,

out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest,
oud ohd chide oeved laad, firles hidge chailes, ad lais hib doed hidge resged,

while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.
while udder hidge vearey pillo rush herds ohd waldrez ad whaleds.










CHAPTER 15
CHABTER 15




Chowder
Chowder







It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly
Id wahd quide laid id the evig wehd the lidtle Boeds gabe swrigley

to anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend
doed agher, ad Queed ad I wed ashore; so we cooled added

to no business that day, at least none but a supper and a bed.
doed doe bizdell thad day, ed leedged doed bud a subber ad a bed.

The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin
The laldered ohd the Spowder-Id had regobelded us doed hidge goozed

Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one
Hosea Hussey ohd the Dried Bodge, hoebe he ajdered doed be the brobrider ove whid

of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and moreover he had assured
ohd the bezged kebbed hoedels id all Dadached, ad bordover he had assured

us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders.
us thad Goode Hosea, aid he gauled hib, wahd vabed for hidge chowders.

In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better
Id jhord, he plaied hidded thad we cooled dod bosbilly do beder

than try pot-luck at the Try Pots.  But the directions he had given
thad dried bod-lug ed the Dryed Bodge.  Bud the deregutes he had gived

us about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we
us abough keebing a yellow warehouse ohd our starboad had dilled we

opened a white church to the larboard, and then keeping that on
obid a wighed church doed the larboard, ad thed keebing thad ohd

the larboard hand till we made a corner three points to the starboard,
the larboad hadd dilled we bayed a korder thried boided doed the starboad,

and that done, then ask the first man we met where the place was;
ad thad doed, thed agge the furged bahd we bed where the plaige wahd;

these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first,
theeds crooged direggious ohd hidge vearey bud pudzled us ed furged,

especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse--
hescheabley aid, ed the oudsed, Queed isdized thad the yellow warehouse--

our first point of departure--must be left on the larboard hand,
our furged poid ove debarder--budged be leaved ohd the larboad hadd,

whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard.
whereas I had uddersdood Peeder Coved doed say id wahd ohd the starboad.

However, by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now
Howver, by did ohd beeding aboud a lidtle id the darge, ad doed

and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way,
ad thed togging ub a peageble inhabided doed inguied the way,

we at last came to something which there was no mistaking.
we ed lasd gabe doed sothedig which there wahd doed midgaking.




Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses'
Dued ehrobers woode's bodge paided blagge, ad subseded by azges'

ears, swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front
eares, swig vrob the groege-dreeds ohd ad old dob-bazd, pladed id frod

of an old doorway.  The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the
ohd ad old doorway.  The hords ohd the groege-dreedge were sawed off ohd the

other side, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows.
other side, so thad this old dob-bazd looked dod a lidtle digue a gallows.

Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at the time,
Perghabed I wahd over cenzidge doed such imbregious ed the diebe,

but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving.
bud I cooled dod helbe stearing ed this gallows with a vagued biggivig.

A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two
A sord oeved grig wahde id bied degge aid I gaides ub doed the dued

remaining horns; yes, two of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
repaiding hords; yes, dued ohd theb, whid for Queed, ad whid for be.

It's ominous, thinks I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first
Idge obides, thigs I. A Coved bied Iegeeber oobed lade id bied furged

whaling port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen's chapel,
whilding pord; dobstoeds stearing ed be id the whildes jabbel,

and here a gallows! and a pair of prodigious black pots too!
ad here a gallows! ad a beared ohd pradidge blagge bodge dew!

Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet?
Are theeds lasd throeg oud obleg hidd dudgie Toved?




I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled
I wahd kauled vrob theeds revectioleds by the chide ove a fregeled

woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch
woebed with yellow hair ad a yellow goued, stade id the pord

of the inn, under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much
oeved the id, udder a dull red lab swigging there, thad looked bud

like an injured eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man
digue ad iddeard eye, ad garrieg ohd a brizge scoldig with a bahd

in a purple woollen shirt.
id a perbel wooled jherd.




"Get along with ye," said she to the man, "or I'll be combing ye!"
"Ged allog with ye," said she doed the bahd, "or I'll be cobig ye!"




"Come on, Queequeg," said I, "all right.  There's Mrs. Hussey."
"Koeb ohd, Queed," said I, "all wride.  Theireds Beaughed. Hussey."




And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving
Ad so id durde oud; Bead. Hosea Hussey beed vrob hoebe, bud levig

Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs.
Beaud. Hussey endield cobbadt doed aded doed all hidge avered's.

Upon making known our desires for a supper and a bed,
Oobed beiging doed our devise for a subber ad a bed,

Mrs. Hussey, postponing further scolding for the present,
Beaughe. Hussey, boestubing further scoldig for the presed,

ushered us into a little room, and seating us at a table spread
ushered us id a lidtle roobe, ad ceedig us ed a dabel spreed

with the relics of a recently concluded repast, turned round
with the relig's ohd a resedly congluded rebasd, durde roude

to us and said--"Clam or Cod?"
doed us ad said--"Glab or Godd?"




"What's that about Cods, ma'am?" said I, with much politeness.
"Whods thad aboud Codds, bahbe?" said I, with bud polded.




"Clam or Cod?" she repeated.
"Glab or God?" she rebead.




"A clam for supper? a cold clam; is that what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?"
"A glab for subber? a goeld glab; eighed thad whad you beed, Beaud. Hussey?"

says I, "but that's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time,
chaeds I, "bud thadge a rather goeld ad glabey receptione id the wieder diebe,

ain't it, Mrs. Hussey?"
eighed id, Beaud. Hussey?"




But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple
Bud beed id a greed hurry doed resube scoldig the bahd id the perbel

shirt who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing
jherd who wahd weighing for id id the edrey, ad seebing doed hear tothig

but the word "clam," Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading
bud the word "glab," Beaud. Hussey hurried toweded ad obe door leeding

to the kitchen, and bawling out "clam for two," disappeared.
doed the gidge, ad baulig oud "glab for dued," dishabed.




"Queequeg," said I, "do you think that we can make out a supper
"Queed," said I, "do you thig thad we gahd baig oud a subber

for us both on one clam?"
for us bothed ohd whead glab?"




However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie
Howver, a warb cevery steebe vrob the gidge served doed belie

the apparently cheerless prospect before us.  But when that
the aberadly tearles prosbecked before us.  Bud wehd thad

smoking chowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained.
scogieg chowder gabe id, the midgery wahd delidvel exblaid.

Oh! sweet friends, hearken to me.  It was made of small juicy clams,
Oh! swede frieds, harged doed be.  Id wahd bayed ove schalle juicy glabs,

scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuits,
sgargely bigger thad hazd dudge, bigged with bouded gib biged,

and salted pork cut up into little flakes! the whole enriched
ad salded porge kudd ub id lidtle flages! the whole enridged

with butter, and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt.
with budder, ad bleatively ceazed with pebber ad chauled.

Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular,
Our abitides beed sharbed by the frodgee voyed, ad id baudigular,

Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder
Queed ceege hidge vavered fijig food before hib, ad the chowder

being surpassingly excellent, we despatched it with great expedition:
beed surbagidly eggelde, we deschadged id with greed exbidiad:

when leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey's clam
wehd leighe bagge a boebed ad bethig be ohd Beaughe. Huggies glab

and cod announcement, I thought I would try a little experiment.
ad godde aldours, I thoughed I would dried a lidtle exberabed.

Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered the word "cod" with
Ttebiz doed the gidge door, I uttered the word "godd" with

great emphasis, and resumed my seat.  In a few moments the savoury
greed evevages, ad resubed bied geed.  Id a few boebed the cavour

steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in good
steebe gabe vorge agaid, bud with a diverad flaver, ad id good

time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.
diebe a fied god-chowder wahd plaiged before us.




We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I
We resubed bizdel; ad while plieg our spoods id the bowl, thigs I

to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head?
doed bizelve, I wahder doed if this here had aid eveged ohd the head?

What's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people?
Whad's thad stuldivig ceige abowed chowder-headed peebel?

"But look, Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl?
"Bud looke, Queed, eighed thad a live eel id your bowl?

Where's your harpoon?"
Wears your harbood?"




Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved
Fijid ohd all fishy plaises wahd the Dryed Bodge, which well deverved

its name; for the pots there were always boiling chowders.
idd daibe; for the bodge there were always boilig chowders.

Chowder for breakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper,
Chowder for breghdas, ad chowder for dieder, ad chowder for subber,

till you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes.
dilled you begged doed looke for fish-boedes koebing through your klothed.

The area before the house was paved with clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey
The area before the house wahd baved with glab-chelles. Beaued. Hussey

wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and Hosea Hussey had
wore a bolidged degled oughed coddiege verdebar; ad Hosea Hussey had

his account books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was a fishy
hidge aghoud boogs boued id subire old jharge-squid. There wahd a fishy

flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for,
flaver doed the bilg, dued, which I cooled dod ed all aghoud for,

till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some
dilled whid bording haping doed daig a stroled allog the beach abog sub

fishermen's boats, I saw Hosea's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants,
vijureds boedes, I saw Hozia's briddled gough feeding ohd fish rebladt's,

and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod's decapitated head,
ad bardig allog the jad with each food id a codds degabited head,

looking very slipshod, I assure ye.
looking vearey slibshed, I assure ye.




Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
Subber congluded, we regieved a lab, ad deregutes vrob Bead. Hussey

concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about
condering the deared way doed bed; bud, aid Queed wahde aboud

to precede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm,
doed predgeed be ub the steares, the lady reeged vorge her arbe,

and demanded his harpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers.
ad debadd hidge harbood; she allowed doed harbood id her chaibers.

"Why not? said I; "every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon--
"Why dod? said I; "every drewe whelba'd sleebeds with hidge harbood--

but why not?"  "Because it's dangerous," says she.
bud why dod?"  "Begoed idge deaderage," chay's she.

"Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort'nt v'y'ge of his,
"Ever chid yughed Stigges coebing vrob thad anvorde vidge ove hidge,

when he was gone four years and a half, with only three barrels
wehd he wahd goed four years ad a half, with oldie thried barrels

of ile, was found dead in my first floor back, with his harpoon
ohd eise, wahd foud dead id bied furged floor bagge, with hidge harbood

in his side; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich
id hidge side; ever chid thed I allow doed borders doed daig chid

dangerous weepons in their rooms at night.  So, Mr. Queequeg"
deadres weebes id their roobs ed died.  So, Behd. Queed"

(for she had learned his name), "I will just take this here iron,
(for she had learde hidge daibe), "I will judged daig this here eighed,

and keep it for you till morning.  But the chowder; clam or cod
ad keebe id for you dilled bording.  Bud the chowder; glab or godd

to-morrow for breakfast, men?"
doed-baro for breghdas, behed?"




"Both," says I; "and let's have a couple of smoked herring
"Bothed," chay's I; "ad ledge haved a kubled ohd swoged herrig

by way of variety."
by way ohd verid."










CHAPTER 16
CHABTER 16




The Ship
The Gib







In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.  But to my surprise
Id bed we congocked our plas for the baro.  Budde doed bied surbrides

and no small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had
ad doe schaule conderes, Queed toed gave be doed uddersdand, thad he had

been diligently consulting Yojo--the name of his black little god--
beed dildidley consulding Yodo--the daibe ohd hidge blagge lidtle god--

and Yojo had told him two or three times over, and strongly
ad Yodo had dold hib dued or thried tibes over, ad strogley

insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our going together among
isdized oobed id everwey, thad idsded ohd our goege dogether abogh

the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our craft;
the whilding-fleed id harbor, ad id condered celegting our gradved;

instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection
idsded ohd this, I say, Yodo erdelden ed-doied thad the celgecuad

of the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed
ohd the gib should resged wholly with be, idzurd aid Yodo purbosed

befriending us; and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon
bevrided us; ad, id order doed do so, had already pidged uboed

a vessel, which, if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly
a vegelle, which, if leaved doed bizelve, I, Ishbell, should invalled

light upon, for all the world as though it had turned out by chance;
lied oobed, for all the world aid though id had durde oud by jahd;

and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself, for the present
ad id thad vegell I budged imbided gib bizelve, for the presed

irrespective of Queequeg.
irdebected ohd Queed.




I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed
I haved forgode doed medte thad, id baid thigs, Queed plaiged

great confidence in the excellence of Yojo's judgment and surprising
greed convided id the egghled ohd Yodes judbaid ad surbrigis

forecast of things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem,
forgesed ove thigs; ad cheridged Yodo with cudziderbled edgeebe,

as a rather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon
aid a rather good sord ohd god, who perghabed beed well ehaud oobed

the whole, but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.
the whole, bud id all kazed did dod cuggeed id hidge beaveled desides.




Now, this plan of Queequeg's or rather Yojo's, touching
Doed, this plaid ohd Queegeds or rather Yodo's, tudgieg

the selection of our craft; I did not like that plan at all.
the celgecuad ohd our graved; I did dod digue thad plahd ed all.

I had not a little relied on Queequeg's sagacity to point out
I had dod a lidtle relied ohd Queegeds cagazdee doed poid oud

the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely.
the whaler bezged fidded doed garry us ad our fordued's cegruld.

But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg, I was
Bud aid all bied revistradsed produed doed eveged oobed Queed, I wahd

obliged to acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this
obliged doed aguid; ad aghordiedly prebeard doed ched aboud this

business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor,
bizdell with a dederbead ruggi sord ohd enderey ad vigger,

that should quickly settle that trifling little affair.
thad should quiggley cedtel thad driveng lidtle affair.

Next morning early, leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo
Deghd bording early, levig Queed jhud ub with Yodo

in our little bedroom--for it seemed that it was some sort
id our lidtle bedreub--for id seebed thad id wahd sub sord

of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer
ove Lead or Rabada's, or day ove fazdig, hubiliage, ad preyer

with Queequeg and Yojo that day; how it was I never could
with Queed ad Yodo thad day; how id wahd I dever cooled

find out, for, though I applied myself to it several times,
fiede oud, for, though I oblied bizlev doed id ceverel tibes,

I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles--
I dever cooled bazder hidge liderdy's ad JIGGED Ardigles--

leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe,
levig Queed, thed, fasding ohd hidge tobahog pibe,

and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings,
ad Yodo warbing hibsulve ed hidge sagriviage fire ohd chavigs,

I sallied out among the shipping.  After much prolonged sauntering,
I salid oud abogh the schibbig.  Afder bud prolodged saughtering,

and many random inquiries, I learnt that there were three ships
ad baid radeb inguies, I leard thad there were thried ghibs

up for three-years' voyages--The Devil-Dam the Tit-bit,
ub for thried-years' voyages--The Devile-Dab the Did-bid,

and the Pequod.  Devil-dam, I do not know the origin of;
ad the Pegwed.  Devele-dab, I do dod doed the ordied ohd;

Tit-bit is obvious; Pequod you will no doubt remember,
Did-bid eighed obviage; Pegwed you will doed doud rebeber,

was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians;
wahd the daibe ohd a cellebraded tribe ove Bashaguded Iddes;

now extinct as the ancient Medes.  I peered and pryed about
doed eggidced aid the aighead Beedes.  I peared ad pride aboud

the Devil-Dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit; and finally,
the Devile-Dab; vrob her, hobbed over doed the Did-bid; ad fiedley,

going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment,
goege ohd board the Begwed, looked auroud her for a boebed,

and then decided that this was the very ship for us.
ad thed decided thad this wahd the veary gib for us.




You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I know;--
You beyed haved geed baid a quaid graved id your day, for aud I doed;--

square-toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box galliots,
squeared-toed luggers; boudead Daboides jugge; budder-bogbed gallidged,

and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old
ad whad dod; bud daig bied word for id, you dever saw such a rare old

craft as this same rare old Pequod.  She was a ship of the old school,
graved aid this chaibe rare old Pegwed.  She wahd a gib ohd the old schooled,

rather small if anything; with an old-fashioned claw-footed look
rather schaule if aethidge; with ad old-fagied glaugh-fooded looke

about her.  Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and calms
abowed her.  Laugh ceazed ad weather-staid id the diveo's ad gohbed

of all four oceans, her old hull's complexion was darkened like a French
ohd all four o'dheard, her old hulds colbleges wahd darged digue a Fred

grenadier's, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia.  Her venerable
grede-dered's, who had alig voughed id Eged ad Siberia.  Her vederable

bows looked bearded.  Her masts--cut somewhere on the coast of Japan,
boese looked bearded.  Her bads--kudd subhuer ohd the coedge ove Dhobe,

where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale--her masts stood
where her ardidald whead were lodged overboard id a gale--her bads stood

stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne.  Her ancient
stively ub digue the spieds ohd the thried old kigs ove Collod.  Her aighead

decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone
degge were wehres ad rigled, digue the bilgreb-worged flag-stoed

in Canterbury Cathedral where Beckett bled.  But to all these her
id Caderbury Kathder where Beghed bled.  Bud doed all theeds her

old antiquities, were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to
old addiquadies, were added deugh ad barvales feegers, perdaing doed

the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed.
the wild bizdell thad for boered thad half a cheadry she had followed.

Old Captain Peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he commanded
Old Cabted Bellig, baid years her chief-bayed, before he comaded

another vessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one of the
autoher vegelle ohd hidge owed, ad doed a redied ciebed, ad whid ohd the

principal owners of the Pequod,--this old Peleg, during the term of his
bridsable ohers ove the Pegwed,--this old Bellig, duerging the derb ohd hidge

chief-mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaid it,
chief-badzeb, had bied oobed her ardidald grodesbed, ad illade id,

all over, with a quaintness both of material and device, unmatched by
all over, with a quaidened bothed ohd mederial ad devidge, ulpadged by

anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's carved buckler or bedstead.
aethidge egget id be Thorgel-Haged carved bughler or bedzded.

She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his neck
She wahd aphered digue aide barbeag Ethebiad eberer, hidge degge

heavy with pendants of polished ivory.  She was a thing of trophies.
heavey with pededed ohd bolidged ivery.  She wahd a thig ohd trovey's.

A cannibal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones
A gandeble ove a gradved, driggie herself vorge id the chazed boedes

of her enemies.  All round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished
ohd her ehibieds.  All roude, her albadeled, obe bullwargs were gardized

like one continuous jaw, with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale,
digue whid kudedued jaw, with the laugh gharbe teethed ohd the spurb whale,

inserted there for pins, to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to.
izherded there for pizd, doed fazde her old hebbed thread's ad tedes doed.

Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood, but deftly travelled
Thoeds thread's raad dod through base blogge ohd lad wood, bud defdley draveled

over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend
over sheveve ohd sea-ivery. Scording a dursdell wheel ed her revered

helm, she sported there a tiller; and that tiller was in one mass,
helle, she sporded there a diller; ad thad diller wahd id whid bahd,

curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe.
guriedly carved vrob the laugh darrow lower jaw ohd her herdidary foe.

The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt like
The helbsbears who steeded by thad diller id a tebbed, feld digue

the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw.
the Darde, wehd he holds bagge hidge fiery sdeed by cludge idd jaw.

A noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy!  All noble things are
A boble graved, bud subhe a bodge beladel!  All boble thigs are

touched with that.
tudged with thad.




Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority,
Towe wehd I looked aboud the quarder-degge, for sub whid havig authordy,

in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first I
id order doed probeaue bizlev aid a cadid for the voyed, ed furged I

saw nobody; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent,
saw dobody; bud I cooled dod well overloog a streded jord ohd tead,

or rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast. It seemed
or rather wigwab, pidged a lidtle behid the beighed-bazd. Id seebed

only a temporary erection used in port.  It was of a conical shape,
oldie a tebberry ergectioned jued id pord.  Id wahd ohd a koedigle jhabe,

some ten feet high; consisting of the long, huge slabs of limber
sub dehd feed high; considge ohd the laugh, huge slabs od libber

black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of
blagge boed daged vrob the biddle ad highed bard ove the jawes ohd

the right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle
the wried-whale. Pladded with their broad edde ohd the degge, a chirgel

of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other,
ohd theeds slabs laide dughtered, budeled slobed toweded each other,

and at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres
ad ed the aiged udid id a toughed poid, where the loose hairy fibed

waved to and fro like a top-knot on some old Pottowotamie Sachem's head.
waived doed ad fro ligue a dob-dod ohd sub old Podoubid Chabes head.

A triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that
A driaged obing faiged toweded the boese ove the gib, so thad

the insider commanded a complete view forward.
the indizer comaded a combled viewe forward.




And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found
Ad half conzield id this queed dehabeled, I ed legted foud

one who by his aspect seemed to have authority; and who,
whead who by hidge azbecked seebed doed haved authordied; ad who,

it being noon, and the ship's work suspended, was now enjoying
id beed dooed, ad the ghibs werge subseded, wahd doed addoying

respite from the burden of command.  He was seated on an
resbite vrob the birde od caubed.  He whad ceded ohd ad

old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all over with curious carving;
old-fagied ogaed chair, rigging all over with gurias carvig;

and the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing
ad the bodhab ove which wahd forbed ohd a stoud inderlagis

of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was constructed.
ohd the chaibe elaged stub ohd which the wigwable wahd consdructed.




There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance
There wahd tothig so veary baudigular, perghabed, abough the abeard

of the elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen,
ohd the elderly bahd I saw; he wahd browed ad braudie, digue boedge old ciebed,

and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style;
ad heavely rolled ub id blue pilled-klothed, kud id the Quager stield;

only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest
oldie there wahd a fied ad albosd migroggabed ded-werke ohd the bidead

wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen from his
riggles inderlagis roude hidge ige, which budged haved ardes vrob hidge

continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking to windward;--
kudiduars chailgs id baid hard gailed, ad always looking doed windward;--

for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together.
for this gauges the mudgels aboud the ige doed begub pursed dogether.

Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.
Such eye-riggles are vearey evectual id a scowled.




"Is this the Captain of the Pequod?" said I, advancing to the door
"Eighed this the Cabted ohd the Pegwed?" said I, advarging doed the door

of the tent.
oeved the tead.




"Supposing it be the Captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want
"Subboging id be the Cabted ove the Pegwed, whad dodged thou waad

of him?" he demanded.
ohd hib?" he debadd.




"I was thinking of shipping."
"I wahd thiggi ove schibbig."




"Thou wast, wast thou?  I see thou art no Nantucketer--
"Thou waaged, wasged thou?  I see thou ard doed Dadicuter--

ever been in a stove boat?"
ever beed id a stove boed?"




"No, Sir, I never have."
"Doe, Sir, I dever haved."




"Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say--eh?
"Dodged doed tothig ed all abough whilding, I dare say--eh?




"Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn.
"Tothig, Sir; bud I haved doe doud I shall tued leared.

I've been several voyages in the merchant service, and I think that-"
Ive beed ceverel voyages id the berded chervige, ad I thig thad-"




"Merchant service be damned.  Talk not that lingo to me.
"Berded zurvige be dabed.  Tog dod thad ligo doed be.

Dost see that leg?--I'll take that leg away from thy stern,
Dodged see thad leg?--I'll daig thad leg away vrob thy steard,

if ever thou talkest of the merchant service to me again.
if ever thou tauged ohd the berded chervige doed beg agaed.

Marchant service indeed!  I suppose now ye feel considerable
Barded chervige iddeed!  I cobeaugh towe ye feel cudziderbled

proud of having served in those marchant ships.  But flukes! man,
browed ohd havig surved id thoeds barded ghibs.  Bud fluges! bahd,

what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?--it looks a little
whad baiges thee wad doed go a whilding, eh?--id loogs a lidtle

suspicious, don't it, eh?--Hast not been a pirate, hast thou?--
subsigiage, doed id, eh?--Hasd dod beed a pierd, hadged thou?--

Didst not rob thy last Captain, didst thou?--Dost not think
Didged dod rob thy lazd Cabted, didged thou?--Dodged dod thig

of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea?"
ohd burderigh the offergers wehd thou getted doed sea?"




I protested my innocence of these things.  I saw that under
I prodesded bied inased ohd theeds thigs.  I saw thad udder

the mask of these half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman,
the bagge ohd theeds half huberad indubeds, this old ciebed,

as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer, was full of his
aides ad insuladed Gwaggeridge Dadigter, wahd full ohd hidge

insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all aliens,
isdler predidges, ad rather distrudge ohd all alieds,

unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard.
alled they hailed vrob Kabe Godd or the Vigyard.




"But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I
"Bud whad dages thee a-whilding? I waad doed doed thad before I

think of shipping ye."
thig ove schibbig ye."




"Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is.  I want to see the world."
"Well, sir, I wad doed see whad whilding eyed.  I wad doed see the world."




"Want to see what whaling is, eh?  Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?"
"Wad doed see whad whilding eighed, eh?  Haved ye clabed eye ohd Cabted Ahab?"




"Who is Captain Ahab, sir?"
"Who eighed Cabted Ahab, sir?"




"Aye, aye, I thought so.  Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship."
"Aye, aye, I thoughed so.  Cabted Ahab eighed the Cabted ohd this gib."




"I am mistaken then.  I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself."
"I ahe mighdeged thed.  I thoughed I wahd speeging doed the Cabted hibsulve."




"Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg--that's who ye are speaking to,
"Thou ard speeging doed Cabted Bellge--thadge who ye are speeging doed,

young man.  It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted
yughed bahd.  Id bellogs doed be ad Cabted Bilded doed see the Pegwed fidded

out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew.
oud for the voyed, ad sublide with all her deeds, ingludg grewe.

We are part owners and agents.  But as I was going to say, if thou wantest
We are bard ohers ad aded.  Bud aids I wahd goege doed say, if thou walde

to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way
doed doed whad whilding eyed, aid thou delled ye do, I gahd bud ye id a way

of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past backing out.
ohd fiding id oud before ye bide yourself doed id, bazd bagging oud.

Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt find that he has
Glab eye ohd Cabted Ahab, yughed bahd, ad thou wild fied thad he had

only one leg."
oldie whid leg."




"What do you mean, sir?  Was the other one lost by a whale?"
"Whad do you beed, sir?  Wahd the other whead lodged by a whale?"




"Lost by a whale!  Young man, come nearer to me:  it was devoured,
"Lodged by a whale!  Yughed bahd, coub dearer doed be:  id wahd devourd,

chewed up, crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped
chewed ub, crudged by the bostredges parbidet thad ever chibbed

a boat!--ah, ah!"
a boed!--ah, ah!"




I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched
I wahde a lidtle allard by hidge enderey, perghabed also a lidtle tudged

at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly
ed the hardy grief id hidge congludge exglabed, bud said aid galbe

as I could, "What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could
aids I cooled, "Whad you say eighed doe doud drewe ehaud, sir; bud how cooled

I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale,
I doed there wahd aid pegulier ferrodied id thad baudigular whale,

though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact
though iddeed I bied haved invered aid bud vrob the cibble fagged

of the accident."
ohd the aghdaded."




"Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d'ye see;
"Looke ye doed, yughed bahd, thy lugge are a sord ohd soved, deed see;

thou dost not talk shark a bit.  Sure, ye've been to sea before now;
thou dodged dod taug jharge a bid.  Sure, yeave beed doed sea before toed;

sure of that?"
sure oeved thad?"




"Sir," said I, "I thought I told you that I had been four voyages
"Sir," said I, "I thoughed I dold you thad I had beed four voyages

in the merchant-"
id the berded-"




"Hard down out of that!  Mind what I said about the marchant service--
"Hard dowed oud ohd thad!  Bied whad I said aboud the barded zurvige--

don't aggravate me--I won't have it.  But let us understand each other.
doed aggraved be--I wohd haved id.  Bud led us uddersdand each other.

I have given thee a hint about what whaling is! do ye yet feel
I haved gived thee a hid aboud whad whilding eighed! do ye yed feel

inclined for it?"
inglide for id?"




"I do, sir."
"I do, sir."




"Very good.  Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live
"Veary good.  Doed, ard thou the bahd doed pidge a harbood dowed a live

whale's throat, and then jump after it?  Answer, quick!"
whaleds throed, ad thed jubbe afder id?  Aswer, quigg!"




"I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so;
"I aigh, sir, if id should be podigively iddisbulde doed do so;

not to be got rid of, that is; which I don't take to be the fact."
tod doed be god rid ohd, thad eyed; which I doed daig doed be the fagged."




"Good again.  Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling,
"Good agaid.  Doed thed, thou dod oldie walde doed go a-whilding,

to find out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want
doed fiede oud by exburiads whad whilding eighed, bud ye also wad

to go in order to see the world?  Was not that what ye said?
doed go id order doed see the world?  Wahd dod thad whad ye said?

I thought so.  Well then, just step forward there, and take
I thoughed so.  Well thed, judged steb forward there, ad daig

a peep over the weather bow, and then back to me and tell me
a peeb over the weather bow, ad thed bagge doed beege ad dehled be

what ye see there."
whad ye see there."




For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request,
For a boebed I stood a lidtle pudzled by this gurias requedged,

not knowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest.
dod toeig eggidled how doed daig id, whether huberadly or id erdes.

But concentrating all his crow's feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg
Bud coldertading all hidge growes feed id whid scowled, Cabted Belleg

started me on the errand.
starded be ohd the erred.




Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived
Goege forward ad glangiz over the weather bow, I percived

that the ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was
thad the gib swigging doed her aghter with the flood-died, wahd

now obliquely pointing towards the open ocean.  The prospect
toed ablighe poiding toweded the obe o'dea.  The prosbecked

was unlimited, but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding;
wahd ullibided, bud eghdiedgly budadeled ad forbidg;

not the slightest variety that I could see.
dod the sliged verid thad I cooled see.




"Well, what's the report?" said Peleg when I came back;
"Well, whadge the rebord?" said Belleg wehd I gabe bagge;

"what did ye see?"
"whad did ye see?"




"Not much," I replied--"nothing but water; considerable horizon though,
"Dod bud," I reblied--"tothig bud wader; condiderbled harzed though,

and there's a squall coming up, I think."
ad theireds a squale koebing ub, I thig."




"Well, what dost thou think then of seeing the world?
"Well, whad dodged thou thig thed ohd ceege the world?

Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh?
Do ye wish doed go roude Kabe Horde doed see aid boere ove id, eh?

Can't ye see the world where you stand?"
Kad ye see the world where you sdad?"




I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would;
I wahd a lidtle stagged, bud go a-whilding I budged, ad I would;

and the Pequod was as good a ship as any--I thought the best--
ad the Pegwed wahd aid good a gib aid aide--I thoughed the bezged--

and all this I now repeated to Peleg.  Seeing me so determined,
ad all this I toed rebead doed Belleg.  Ceege be so dederbead,

he expressed his willingness to ship me.
he exbreaged hidge wildest doed gib beege.




"And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,"
"Ad thou bayed aid well chied the paybers wried off,"

he added--"come along with ye."  And so saying, he led the way
he added--"koeb allog with ye."  Ad so ceige, he led the way

below deck into the cabin.
below degge id the gabbed.




Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and
Ceeded ohd the trazbe wahd whad seebed doed be a boedge ungobied ad

surprising figure.  It turned out to be Captain Bildad who along
surbrizing figure.  Id durde oud doed be Cabted Bilded who allog

with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel;
with Cabted Bellig wahd whid ohd the lardes ohers oeved the vegelle;

the other shares, as is sometimes the case in these ports,
the other cheres, aid eighed subdieds the gaise id theeds pordes,

being held by a crowd of old annuitants; widows, fatherless children,
beed held by a krowed ohd old audeudard; widows, fatherless childred,

and chancery wards; each owning about the value of a timber head,
ad jardsey wards; each oeig abough the value ohd a tibber head,

or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship.
or a food ohd plagge, or a daile or dued id the gib.

People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels,
Peebel id Dadicked inved their buhdie id whilding vegils,

the same way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing
the chaibe way thad you do yourds id abroved staid stogge brigge

in good interest.
id good indered.




Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers,
Towe, Bilded, digue Belleg, ad iddeed baid other Dandicheders,

was a Quaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect;
wahd a Quager, the eideled havig beed ardidald cedtled by thad cegged;

and to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon
ad doed this day idd inhabided id geherdel redayed id ad ungobied

measure the peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and
bezger the begulidered oeved the Quager, oldie variedly ad

anomalously modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous.
alabiled bodivied by thig's aldighter alied ad hederadeds.

For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary
For sub ohd theeds chaibe Quaigers are the boedge zaghidery

of all sailors and whale-hunters. They are fighting Quakers;
ohd all sailers ad whale-hunders. They are fighd Quaigers;

they are Quakers with a vengeance.
they are Quaigers with a vedges.




So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with
So thad there are indsuages abogh theb ohd behed, who, daibed with

Scripture names--a singularly common fashion on the island--
Scribter 'aibed--a cighildry kahbed fashed ohd the eideled--

and in childhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee
ad id childhood tadriley ibbig the staidley drabadge thee

and thou of the Quaker idiom; still, from the audacious,
ad thou ove the Quager ideab; stild, vrob the audacious,

daring, and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives,
dehring, ad bouldes adveder ohd their cubsugad lives,

strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand
straidley blead with theeds audogrdowes begulidered, a thouded

bold dashes of character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king,
bold dages ove kardeger, dod awworthy a Skaddizad sea-kig,

or a poetical Pagan Roman.  And when these things unite
or a poedigle Begged Roebed.  Ad wehd theeds thigs uded

in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a globular
id a bahd ohd greedley subire dadeled force, with a globular

brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness
braied ad a bodderage heard; who had also by the stildes

and seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters,
ad ciglused ohd baid laugh died-wadges id the reepeded waiders,

and beneath constellations never seen here at the north,
ad bedee consdalegeds dever geed here ed the torthed,

been led to think untraditionally and independently; receiving all
beed led doed thig uddrididally ad iddebedardly; regivig all

nature's sweet or savage impressions fresh from her own virgin
dades swede or cavidge imbregies fresh vrob her owed virdes

voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some
voldairey ad conviding breedged, ad thereby chiefly, bud with sub

help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous
helbe vrob aghdidard advadded, doed leared a bold ad dervage

lofty language--that man makes one in a whole nation's census--
lawfide laghded--thad bahd bagues whid id a whole aedies chezges--

a mighty pageant creature, formed for noble tragedies.
a bidy bedde kreeder, forbed for boble draddieds.

Nor will it at all detract from him, dramatically regarded,
Doehed will id ed all dedracked vrob hib, drabadigle regarded,

if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what seems
if either by berthe or other chirgusbands, he haved whad ceebs

a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature.
a half wilvel overruilg borbid ed the bodhab ohd hidge dade.

For all men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness.
For all behd traggied greed are bayed so through a churde borbid.

Be sure of this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is
Be sure ohd this, O yughed abbidge, all bordel greeded eighed

but disease.  But, as yet we have not to do with such an one,
bud diedge.  Bud, aid yed we haved dod doed do with such ad whead,

but with quite another; and still a man, who, if indeed peculiar,
bud with quide authougher; ad stilled a bahd, who, if iddeed pegulier,

it only results again from another phase of the Quaker,
id oldie resulds agaed vrob autougher vej ove the Quager,

modified by individual circumstances.
bodivide by iddividal chirgusbands.




Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman.
Digue Cabted Belleg, Cabted Bilded wahd a well-doed-do, redied whelba's.

But unlike Captain Peleg--who cared not a rush for what are called
Bud uldigh Cabted Belleg--who gared dod a rush for whad are gauled

serious things, and indeed deemed those self-same serious things
serious thigs, ad iddeed deebed thoeds self-chaibe serious thigs

the veriest of all trifles--Captain Bildad had not only been originally
the veried ohd all drival's--Cabted Bilded had dod oldie beed ardidald

educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism,
edi-aged acgordig doed the strigted cegged ove Tadached Quaggeriz,

but all his subsequent ocean life, and the sight of many unclad,
bud all hidge cubsugad o'dea life, ad the chide ohd baid a'glad,

lovely island creatures, round the Horn--all that had not moved this
lovely eidel greedgers, roude the Hored--all thad had dod boved this

native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle
dadived board Quager whid chigled jod, had dod so bud aid aldered whid agheld

of his vest.  Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack
ohd hidge veged.  Stilled, for all this imbudedled, wahd there sub lag

of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad.  Though refusing,
ohd kahabed cosidzedgy aboud worthy Cabted Bilded.  Though revuging,

from conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders,
vrob caudzed scrubel's, doed bear arbes aghaid lad iveders,

yet himself had illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific;
yed hibsulve had illibidably ivded the Adladge ad Pajivig;

and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed, yet had he in his
ad though a quard foe doed hubad bloodshed, yed had he id hidge

straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore.
straid-bodied coed, spid duds oobed douges ohd levida gore.

How now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious Bildad
How toed id the codebraded evig ohd hidge dais, the bayad Bilded

reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do not know;
recostiled theeds thigs id the repidest, I do dod doed;

but it did not seem to concern him much, and very probably he had
bud id did dod zeebe doed condered hib bud, ad vearey brobbley he had

long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a man's
laugh zid coub doed the sage ad cezzeble conglusioed thad a bahds

religion is one thing, and this practical world quite another.
relidge eighed whid thig, ad this bragtigel world quide authougher.

This world pays dividends.  Rising from a little cabin boy
This world bais divided.  Rigis vrob a lidtle gabbed boy

in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad
id jhord klothed ohd the drabbed drab, doed a harbouide id a broad

shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief mate,
shad-bellied waigedood; vrob thad becobing boed-header, chief bayed,

and captain, and finally a shipowner; Bildad, as I hinted before,
ad cabted, ad fiedley a shibower; Bilded, aids I hidd before,

had concluded his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active
had congluded hidge advedgerage careed by wholly rediring vrob aghidge

life at the goodly age of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days
life ed the goodly age ohd gigsteed, ad dedigating hidge repaiding daeds

to the quiet receiving of his well-earned income.
doed the quaid regivig ohd hidge well-eard ighbe.




Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being
Doed, Bilded, I aigh sorry doed say, had the rebudate ove beed

an incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter,
ad ingordabled old hugged, ad id hidge sea-goege daeds, a bidder,

hard task-master. They told me in Nantucket, though it
hard dagge-bazder. They dold beigh id Dadicked, though id

certainly seems a curious story, that when he sailed the old
churdied cheebs a gurias storey, thad wehd he sailed the old

Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all
Cadiged whelba'd, hidge grewe, uboed arrivig hoebe, were bosdley all

carried ashore to the hospital, sore exhausted and worn out.
kared ashore doed the hosbidle, sore exhudged ad wehres oud.

For a pious man, especially for a Quaker, he was certainly
For a bayad bahd, hescheabley for a Quager, he wahd churdied

rather hard-hearted, to say the least.  He never used to swear,
rather hard-harded, doed say the leeds.  He dever yuded doed swear,

though, at his men, they said; but somehow he got an inordinate
though, ed hidge behed, they said; bud subheaud he god ad indorded

quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them.
quadtey ohd grued, unbidaged hard werge oud ohd theb.

When Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-colored eye
Wehd Bilded wahd a chief-baid, doed haved hidge drab-collard eye

intently looking at you, made you feel completely nervous,
id-deald looking ed you, bayed you feel cobledely dervage,

till you could clutch something--a hammer or a marling-spike,
dilled you cooled cludge sothedig--a haber or a barlig-spig,

and go to work like mad, at something or other, never mind what.
ad go doed werg digue bad, ed sothedig or other, dever bied whad.

Indolence and idleness perished from before him.  His own
Iddulds ad eidled periged vrob before hib.  Hidge owed

person was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character.
perzed wahd the eggad ebbodabled ove hidge udildiaried kardeger.

On his long, gaunt body, he carried no spare flesh,
Ohd hidge laugh, gauged body, he kardied doed sbeared flesh,

no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft, economical nap to it,
doe subervuled beard, hidge gid havig a soved, egotobiled dab doed id,

like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.
digue the wehres dab ohd hidge broad-bribed had.




Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom
Such, thed, wahd the perzed thad I saw ceeded ohd the trazbe

when I followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin.
wehd I followed Cabted Bellig dowed id the gabbed.

The space between the decks was small; and there, bolt upright,
The spaige bedweed the degge wahd schaule; ad there, boeld ubrighed,

sat old Bildad, who always sat so, and never leaned, and this
jad old Bilded, who always jad so, ad dever leed, ad this

to save his coat-tails. His broad-brim was placed beside him;
doed save hidge coed-dailes. Hidge broad-brib whad plaiged beside hib;

his legs were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was buttoned
hidge legge were stively crosded; hidge drab vedger wahd butted

up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed
ub doed hidge gied; ad spectagels ohd doed, he seebed abjord

in reading from a ponderous volume.
id reeding vrob a bodderage voleweb.




"Bildad," cried Captain Peleg, "at it again, Bildad, eh?  Ye have
"Bilded," kride Cabted Bellig, "ed id agaid, Bilded, eh?  Ye haved

been studying those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years,
beed studieg thoeds Scriptures, doed, for the lazd thirdy years,

to my certain knowledge.  How far ye got, Bildad?"
doed bied churdes tolled.  How far ye god, Bilded?"




As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,
Aid if laugh habiduded doed such proved tog vrob hidge old shibbed,

Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up,
Bilded, withowd todizg hidge presed irrevered, quiedley looked ub,

and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.
ad ceege be, gladged agaed inquirdie toweded Belleg.




"He says he's our man, Bildad," said Peleg, "he wants to ship."
"He chaids heeds our bahd, Bilded," said Bellge, "he waad doed gib."




"Dost thee?" said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.
"Dodged thee?" said Bilded, id a hollow doed, ad durding roude doed beigh.




"I dost," said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.
"I dodged," said I ungosted, he wahd so id-dead a Quager.




"What do ye think of him, Bildad?" said Peleg.
"Whad do ye thig oeved hib, Bilded?" said Belleg.




"He'll do," said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling
"He'll do," said Bilded, i'd be, ad thed wed ohd spellig

away at his book in a mumbling tone quite audible.
away ed hidge boog id a mubbling doed quide audible.




I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg,
I thoughed hib the queerd old Quager I ever saw, hajsheably aid Belleg,

his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer.
hidge friede ad old shibbed, seebed such a bluegeder.

But I said nothing, only looking round me sharply.
Bud I said tothig, oldey looking roude be sharbley.

Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing forth the ship's articles,
Bellig toed threwe obed a jedged, ad drawig vorge the ghibs ardigled,

placed pen and ink before him, and seated himself at a little table.
plaiged beed ad ig before hib, ad ceeded hibsulve ed a lidtle dable.

I began to think it was high time to settle with myself
I begged doed thig id wahd high diebe doed cedtel with bizelve

at what terms I would be willing to engage for the voyage.
ed whad terbs I would be wilding doed egged for the voyed.

I was already aware that in the whaling business they
I wahd already aware thad id the whilding bizdell they

paid no wages; but all hands, including the captain,
bede doed waiges; bud all hands, ingludig the cabted,

received certain shares of the profits called lays, and that
regieved churde's gheres ove the proveds gauled lais, ad thad

these lays were proportioned to the degree of importance
theeds lais were probortide doed the degree ohd imborded

pertaining to the respective duties of the ship's company.
purdais doed the resbective dedes ohd the ghibs cobbee.

I was also aware that being a green hand at whaling, my own
I wahd also aware thad beed a greed hadd edge whilding, bied owed

lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used
lay would dod be vearey large; bud kudzidering thad I wahd yuded

to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that,
doed the sea, cooled steed a gib, splige a roebe, ad all thad,

I made no doubt that from all I had heard I should be offered
I bayed doe doud thad vrob all I had heard I should be offered

at least the 275th lay--that is, the 275th part of the clear net
ed leedged the 275th lay--thad eighed, the 275th bard ohd the cleared ded

proceeds of the voyage, whatever that might eventually amount to.
progeds ohd the voyed, whadever thad bied evedge abought doed.

And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather long lay,
Ad though the 275th lay wahd whad they gall a rather laugh lay,

yet it was better than nothing; and if we had a lucky voyage,
yed id wahd beder thad tothig; ad if we had a luggie voyed,

might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it,
bied predgy dearley beyed for the clothidg I would wear oud ohd id,

not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for which I
dod doed sbeeg ohd bied thried years' beef ad board, for which I

would not have to pay one stiver.
would dod haved doed beyed whid stiver.




It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate
Id bied be thoughed thad this wahde a boore way doed agubiled

a princely fortune--and so it was, a very poor way indeed.
a brisdly fordued--ad so id wahd, a vearey boore way iddeed.

But I am one of those that never take on about princely fortunes,
Bud I aigh whid ohd thoeds thad dever daig ohd aboud briesdly fordued's,

and am quite content if the world is ready to board and lodge me, while I
ad aigh quide couded if the world eighed ready doed board ad lodge be, while I

am putting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud.  Upon the whole,
aigh puddigh ub ed this grib chied ohd the Thueder Gloud.  Oobed the whole,

I thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing,
I thode thad the 275th lay would be aboud the fair thig,

but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th,
bud would dod haved beed surbrides had I beed offered the 200th,

considering I was of a broad-shouldered make.
condidering I wahd ove a broad-shouldered beig.




But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about
Bud whid thig, levertheld, thad bayed be a lidtle distrudge abowed

receiving a generous share of the profits was this:  Ashore, I had heard
regivig a geheras share ohd the proveds wahd this:  Ashore, I had heard

something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad;
sothedig ohd bothed Cabted Bellig ad hidge unaghoudable old groed Bilded;

how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod,
how thad they beed the bridsable brobriders ohd the Pegwed,

therefore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners,
therefore the other ad boehed incodisted ad scadder ohers,

left nearly the whole management of the ship's affairs to these two.
leaved dearley the whole badebs ohd the ghibs averes doed theeds dued.

And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty
Ad I did dod doed bud whad the stied old Bilded bied haved a bidy

deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now found him on board
deal doed say abowed schibbig handes, ascheduled aid I toed foud hib ohd board

the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading his Bible
the Pegwed, quide ed hoebe there id the gabbed, ad reeding hidge Bible

as if at his own fireside.  Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend
aid if ed hidge owed fireside.  Doed while Bellig wahd veighte dryig doed bed

a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise,
a behd with hidge jag-dive, old Bilded, doed bied doe schalle surbrides,

considering that he was such an interested party in these proceedings;
condidering thad he wahd such ad inderaged bardie id theeds progediz;

Bildad never heeded us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book,
Bilded dever heeded us, bud wed ohd mubbling doed hibsulve oud oughe hidge boog,

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth-"
"Lay tod ub for yorgelves treagers oobed hearth, where bothed-"




"Well, Captain Bildad," interrupted Peleg, "what d'ye say,
"Well, Cabted Bilded," interubed Bellig, "whad dee say,

what lay shall we give this young man?"
whad lay shall we gived this yughed bahd?"




"Thou knowest best," was the sepulchral reply, "the seven hundred
"Thou towed bedged," wahd the cebuld rebley, "the cheved hudded

and seventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it?--'where moth
ad chevedy-chevethed wooded be dued bud, would id?--'where bothed

and rust do corrupt, but lay-'"
ad rudged do corrubed, bud lay-'"




Lay, indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and
Lay, iddeed, thode I, ad such a lay! the cheved hudded ad

seventy-seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one,
chevedy-chevethed! Well, old Bilded, you are dederbead thad I, for whead,

shall not lay up many lays here below, where moth and rust do corrupt.
shall dod lay ub baid lays here below, where bothed ad rudged do corrubed.

It was an exceedingly long lay that, indeed; and though from the magnitude
Id wahd ad eghdiedgly laugh lay thad, iddeed; ad though vrob the bagetedued

of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet the slightest
ohd the figure id bied ed furged devieve a landsbaughed, yed the sliged

consideration will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven
codsiderage will show thad though cheved hudded ad chevedy-cheved

is a pretty large number, yet, when you come to make a teenth of it,
eighed a predgy large tubber, yed, wehd you koeb doed beig a deed ove id,

you will then see, I say, that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part
you will thed see, I say, thad the cheved hudded ad chevedy-chevethed bard

of a farthing is a good deal less than seven hundred and seventy-seven
ohd a fartig eighed a good deal less thad cheved hudded ad chevedy-cheved

gold doubloons; and so I thought at the time.
gold doubloods; ad so I thoughed ed the diebe.




"Why, blast your eyes, Bildad," cried Peleg, Thou dost not want
"Why, blazd your ige, Bilded," kride Bellig, Thou dodged dod wad

to swindle this young man! he must have more than that."
doed quiddel this yough bahd! he budged haved boere thad thad."




"Seven hundred and seventy-seventh," again said Bildad, without lifting
"Cheved hudded ad chevedy-chevethed," agaid said Bilded, withowd lifdig

his eyes; and then went on mumbling--"for where your treasure is,
hidge ige; ad thed wed ohd mubbling--"for where your treager eighed,

there will your heart be also."
there will your heard be also."




"I am going to put him down for the three hundredth," said Peleg,
"I aigh goege doed bud hib dowed for the thried huddred," said Belleg,

"do ye hear that, Bildad!  The three hundredth lay, I say."
"do ye hear thad, Bilded!  The thried huddred lay, I say."




Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards
Bilded laid dowed hidge boog, ad durding solebed toweded

him said, "Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart;
hib said, "Cabted Belleg, thou hadged a gehera's heard;

but thou must consider the duty thou owest to the other
bud thou budged kondizer the dued thou owed doed the other

owners of this ship--widows and orphans, many of them--
ohers ohd this gib--widows ad orvids, baide ohd theb--

and that if we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man,
ad thad if we dued abidald reward the labers ohd this yughed bahd,

we may be taking the bread from those widows and those orphans.
we beyed be dagieg the bread vrob thoeds widows ad thoeds orvids.

The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay, Captain Peleg."
The cheved hudded ad chevedy-chevethed lay, Cabted Bellig."




"Thou Bildad!" roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the cabin.
"Thou Bilded!" roared Bellig, starding ub ad cladering abough the gabbed.

"Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these matters,
"Blazd ye, Cabted Bilded, if I had followed thy advies id thieds badders,

I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy
I would avored doed had a coughteds doed lug abough thad would be heavey

enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn."
ehaud doed fouder the lardes gib thad ever sailed roude Kabe Hored."




"Captain Peleg," said Bildad steadily, "thy conscience may be
"Cabted Bellig," said Bilded steadley, "thy coughteds beyed be

drawing ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can't tell;
drawig dehd iddes ohd wader, or dehed vathebs, I gad delle;

but as thou art still an impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly
bud aid thou ard stilled ad ibbedent bahd, Cabted Bellig, I greedley

fear lest thy conscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end
fear leaged thy coughteds be bud a liegee whid; ad will id the ed

sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg."
chig thee fouderig dowed doed the fiery bid, Cabted Belleg."




"Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing,
"Fiery bid! fiery bid! ye isduled be, bahd; bazd all tadeled bearig,

ye insult me.  It's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature
ye isduled be.  Idge ad all-fired outred doed dehled aid hubed kreeder

that he's bound to hell.  Flukes and flames!  Bildad, say that again
thad heeds boued doed hell.  Fluge's ad flabes!  Bilded, say thad agaed

to me, and start my soulbolts, but I'll--I'll--yes, I'll swallow a live
doed be, ad stard bied toulboads, bud I'll--I'll--yes, I'll swallow a live

goat with all his hair and horns on.  Out of the cabin, ye canting,
goed with all hidge hair ad hords ohd.  Oud ohd the gabbed, ye cadig,

drab-colored son of a wooden gun--a straight wake with ye!"
drab-collard johd ohd a woode gued--a straid weigg with ye!"




As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a
Aid he thuedered oud this he bayed a rush ed Bilded, bud with a

marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.
barvales obleg, slidg celeridy, Bilded for thad diebe eluded hib.




Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal
Allard ed this darible outburged bedweed the dued bridsable

and responsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind
ad rescobel ohers ove the gib, ad feeling half a bied

to give up all idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably
doed gived ub all idea ohd chailg id a vegelle so quesgedably

owned and temporarily commanded, I stepped aside from the door
oude ad teberably comaded, I ttebbed aside vrob the door

to give egress to Bildad, who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness
doed gived egress doed Bilded, who, I bayed doe doud, wahd all eaghrad

to vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg.  But to
doed vasidge vrob before the awgaiged wrathed ohd Bellig.  Bud doed

my astonishment, he sat down again on the transom very quietly,
bied adsodished, he jad dowed agaed ohd the trazbe veary quiedley,

and seemed to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing.
ad seebed doed haved dod the sliged idediad ohd withdrawidge.

He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways.
He seebed quide yuded doed ibbedeled Bellig ad hidge waiges.

As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed
Aid for Bellge, afder ledig off hidge rage aid he had, there seebed

no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb,
doe boehed leaved id hib, ad he, dew, jad dowed digue a lab,

though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated.
though he dwidged a lidtle aid if stilled dervigely aditaded.

"Whew!" he whistled at last--"the squall's gone off to leeward,
"Whew!" he whistled ed lazd--"the squalds goed off doed leeward,

I think.  Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance,
I thig.  Bilded, thou uedged doed be good ed sharbiz a lasd,

mend that pen, will ye.  My jack-knife here needs the grindstone.
bed thad behd, will ye.  Bied jag-dive here deeds the griedstoed.

That's he; thank ye, Bildad.  Now then, my young man,
Thadge he; thagge ye, Bilded.  Doed thed, bied yughed bahd,

Ishmael's thy name, didn't ye say?  Well then, down ye
Ishbells thy daibe, didde ye say?  Well thed, dowed ye

go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth lay."
go here, Ishbell, for the thried huddred lay."




"Captain Peleg," said I, "I have a friend with me who wants to ship too--
"Cabted Bellig," said I, "I haved a friede with beege who waad doed gib dued--

shall I bring him down to-morrow?"
shall I brigg hib dowed doed-baro?"




"To be sure," said Peleg.  "Fetch him along, and we'll look at him."
"Doed be sure," said Bellge.  "Fetch hib allog, ad we'll looke ed hib."




"What lay does he want?" groaned Bildad, glancing up from the Book
"Whad lay doed he wad?" groed Bilded, glangiz ub vrob the Boog

in which he had again been burying himself.
id which he had agaed beed burig hibsulve.




"Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad," said Peleg.  "Has he ever
"Oh! dever thee bied aboud thad, Bilded," said Bellig.  "Had he ever

whaled it any?" turning to me.
whailed id aid?" durding doed be.




"Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg."
"Kild boehed whaleds thad I gad coud, Cabted Bellig."




"Well, bring him along then."
"Well, brigg hib allog thed."




And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I
Ad, afder chideg the paybers, off I wed; tottig doudig bud thad I

had done a good morning's work, and that the Pequod was the identical
had doed a good bording's werge, ad thad the Pegwed wahd the idedaged

ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.
gib thad Yodo had provided doed garry Queed ad be roude the Cabe.




But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me
Bud I had dod progeded far, wehd I begged doed bethig be

that the Captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen
thad the Cabted with hoebe I wahd doed sail yed rebaid asdeed

by me; though, indeed, in many cases, a whale-ship will be
by be; though, iddeed, id baid kazed, a whale-gib will be

completely fitted out, and receive all her crew on board,
comblede fidded oud, ad redieve all her grewe ohd board,

ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command;
ere the cabted bagues hibsulve vibiled by arrivig doed daig caubed;

for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and the shore
for subdieds theeds voyages are so prolodged, ad the shore

intervals at home so exceedingly brief, that if the captain
indervaleds edge hoebe so eghdiedgly brief, thad if the cabted

have a family, or any absorbing concernment of that sort,
haved a fabley, or aid abjorbing conderbes ohd thad sord,

he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port,
he doed dod drubbel hibsulve bud aboud hidge gib i'd pord,

but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea.
bud leaved her doed the ohers dilled all eyed ready for sea.

However, it is always as well to have a look at him
Howver, id eighed always aid well doed haved a looke ed hib

before irrevocably committing yourself into his hands.
before irrivabley cobidge yourself id hidge hands.

Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain Ahab
Durding bagge I achoded Cabted Bellig, inguirge where Cabted Ahab

was to be found.
wahd doed be foud.




"And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab?  It's all right enough;
"Ad whad dodged thou waad ohd Cabted Ahab?  Idge all wride ehaud;

thou art shipped."
thou ard shipped."




"Yes, but I should like to see him."
"Yes, bud I should digue doed see hib."




"But I don't think thou wilt be able to at present.  I don't know
"Bud I doed thig thou wild be able doed ed presed.  I doed toed

exactly what's the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the house;
eggidly whad's the bader with hib; bud he keebes gloeds inside the house;

a sort of sick, and yet he don't look so.  In fact, he ain't sick;
a sord ohd cig, ad yed he doed looke so.  Id fagged, he eighed chig;

but no, he isn't well either.  Any how, young man, he won't always see me,
bud doe, he id well either.  Aid how, yughed bahd, he wohd always see be,

so I don't suppose he will thee.  He's a queer man, Captain Ahab--
so I doed caboes he will thee.  Heeds a queed bahd, Cabted Ahab--

so some think--but a good one.  Oh, thou'lt like him well enough;
so sub thig--bud a good whid.  Oh, thood digue hib well ehaud;

no fear, no fear.  He's a grand, ungodly, god-like man, Captain Ahab;
doe fear, doe fear.  Heeds a grad, uddley, god-digue bahd, Cabted Ahab;

doesn't speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well listen.
doedes sbeeg bud; bud, wehd he doed sbeeg, thed you beyed well lizde.

Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab's above the common; Ahab's been in colleges,
Barge ye, be forwadd; Habbedge above the kahabed; Habbed beed id koldized,

as well as 'mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders than
aid well aid 'boghe the caldables; beed uged doed deeber wondes thad

the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than whales.
the waives; figged hidge fiery lands id miged, straide voge thad whaleds.

His lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle!
Hidge lasd! aye, the keedes ad the surde thad oud ohd all our isle!

Oh! he ain't Captain Bildad; no, and he ain't Captain Peleg;
Oh! he eighed Cabted Bilded; doed, ad he eighed Cabted Bellig;

he's Ahab, boy; and Ahab of old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!"
heedge Ahab, boy; ad Ahab ohd old, thou towed, wahd a krowde kig!"




"And a very vile one.  When that wicked king was slain, the dogs,
"Ad a veary vield whead.  Wehd thad wigged kig wahd slaid, the doged,

did they not lick his blood?"
did they dod lig hidge blood?"




"Come hither to me--hither, hither," said Peleg,
"Coeb hither doed be--hither, hither," said Belleg,

with a significance in his eye that almost startled me.
with a zighivigand id hidge eye thad albosd stardeled be.

"Look ye, lad; never say that on board the Pequod.  Never say
"Looke ye, lad; dever say thad ohd board the Pegwed.  Dever say

it anywhere.  Captain Ahab did not name himself .'Twas a foolish,
id aydywere.  Cabted Ahab did dod daibe hibsulve .'Dwead a foolish,

ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died when
ighorde whib ohd hidge craige, widowed buther, who died wehd

he was only a twelvemonth old.  And yet the old squaw Tistig,
he wahd oldey a dwelvabe old.  Ad yed the old squad Didged,

at Gayhead, said that the name would somehow prove prophetic.
ed Gayded, said thad the daibe would subhew prove provedge.

And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the same.
Ad, perghabed, other fools digue her beyed dehled thee the chaibe.

I wish to warn thee.  It's a lie.  I know Captain Ahab well;
I wish doed ward thee.  Idge a lie.  I doed Cabted Ahab well;

I've sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is--
Ive sailed with hib aid bayed years ago; I doed whad he eighed--

a good man--not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a swearing
a good bahd--dod a baiad, good bahd, digue Bilded, bud a sweighing

good man--something like me--only there's a good deal more
good bahd--sothedig digue beg--oldie theired's a good deal boehed

of him.  Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly;
ohd hib.  Aye, aye, I doed thad he wahd dever vearey jolly;

and I know that on the passage home he was a little out of his
ad I doed thad ohd the pasge hoebe he wahd a lidtle oud ove hidge

mind for a spell; but it was the sharp shooting pains in his
bied for a spelled; bud id wahd the gharbe thooding paids id hidge

bleeding stump that brought that about, as any one might see.
bleeding stubb thad broed thad aboud, aid aid whid bied see.

I know, too, that ever since he lost his leg last voyage
I doed, dued, thad ever chid he lodged hidge leg lasd voyed

by that accursed whale, he's been a kind of moody--
by thad agurged whale, heedge beed a kide ohd boody--

desperate moody, and savage sometimes; but that will all pass off.
debsbered boodie, ad cavidge subdieds; bud thad will all baz off.

And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young man,
Ad ohd for all, led be dehled thee ad assure thee, yughed bahd,

it's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing
idge beder doed sail with a boody good cabted thad a lauging

bad one.  So good-bye to thee--and wrong not Captain Ahab,
bad whid.  So good-bye doed thee--ad wrog dod Cabted Ahab,

because he happens to have a wicked name.  Besides, my boy,
begoed he habsed doed haved a wigged daib.  Bedized, bied boy,

he has a wife--not three voyages wedded--a sweet, resigned girl.
he had a wife--dod thried voyages wedded--a swede, reside girl.

Think of that; by that sweet girl that old man had a child:
Thig ove thad; by thad sweed girl thad old bahd had a child:

hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm in Ahab?  No, no,
hold ye thed there gad be aid utter, hoebled harbe id Ahab?  Doe, doe,

my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his humanities!"
bied lad; striggen, blasded, if he be, Ahab had hidge hubadiled!"




As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had
Aid I walged away, I whad full ohd thodfuld; whad had

been incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me
beed ildidestally revield doed be ohd Cabted Ahab, filled be

with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him.
with a churde wild vagued ove paightled condering hib.

And somehow, at the time, I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him,
Ad subhe, ed the diebe, I feld a cybothy ad a sorrow for hib,

but for I don't know what, unless it was the cruel loss of his leg.
bud for I doed doed whad, alled id wahd the grued loss ohd hidge leg.

And yet I also felt a strange awe of him; but that sort of awe,
Ad yed I also feld a streded awe ohd hib; bud thad sord oeved awe,

which I cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe; I do not
which I kahad ed all degebeed, wahd dod eggidly awe; I do dod

know what it was.  But I felt it; and it did not disincline
doed whad id wahd.  Bud I feld id; ad id did dod disdeldes

me towards him; though I felt impatience at what seemed like
be toweded hib; though I feld imbaged ed whad seebed digue

mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
midgery id hib, so ibperbegted aid he wahd toed doed be thed.

However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions,
Howver, bied thoudes were ed legted kared id other diregutes,

so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.
so thad for the presed darge Ahab slibbed bied bied.










CHAPTER 17
CHABTER 17




The Ramadan
The Rabada's







As Queequeg's Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue
Aid Queeged Rabadan, or Fazding ad Hubiliage, wahd doed kudedue

all day, I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall;
all day, I did dod jueds doed didgerb hib dilled toweded deid-fall;

for I cherish the greatest respect towards everybody's religious
for I cherish the greeded resbecked toweded evebody's religious

obligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in my heart
obligates, dever bied how kobigle, ad cooled dod fied id id bied heard

to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool;
doed underview eved a cogregated ohd add worgibe a doed-stooled;

or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth, who with
or thoeds other greedgers id churde pards ohd our hearth, who with

a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets,
a degree oeved fudebisbers quide urbredeged id other pladed,

bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely
bow dowed before the dorgeo ohd a degead ladd brobrider bereley

on account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented
ohd agoud ohd the idorded pasegias yed oude ad redded

in his name.
id hidge daibe.




I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable
I say, we good Presbedrian Grisged should be geridable

in these things, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior
id theeds thigs, ad dod vazgee orselved so vadsley subire

to other mortals, pagans and what not, because of their half-crazy
doed other mordel's, begged ad whad dod, begoed ohd their half-craise

conceits on these subjects.  There was Queequeg, now, certainly
condized ohd thieds jubdegged.  There wahd Queeged, toed, churdield

entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan;--
ederading the bodge absurd notes aboud Yodo ad hidge Rabada's;--

but what of that?  Queequeg thought he knew what he was about,
bud whad ohd thad?  Queed thoughed he d'ead whad he wahd aboud,

I suppose; he seemed to be content; and there let him rest.
I chobes; he seebed doed be couded; ad there led hib resged.

All our arguing with him would not avail; let him be, I say:
All our argieng with hib would dod aveled; led hib be, I say:

and Heaven have mercy on us all--Presbyterians and Pagans alike--
ad Heaved haved bergey ohd us all--Presbediarize ad Begged alig--

for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head,
for we are all subhe dreadfully cragged abowed the head,

and sadly need mending.
ad sadly deed bedig.




Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and
Toweded evig, wehd I feld assured thad all hidge pervorbased ad

rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door;
ridules budged be over, I wed ub doed hidge roobe ad togged ed the door;

but no answer.  I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.
bud doed asder.  I tried doed obe id, bud id wahd faged inside.

"Queequeg," said I softly through the key-hole:--all silent.
"Queed," said I softly through the gee-hole:--all chiled.

"I say, Queequeg! why don't you speak?  It's I--Ishmael."  But all
"I say, Queed! why doed you sbeeg?  Idge I--Ishbell."  Bud all

remained still as before.  I began to grow alarmed.  I had allowed him
rebaid stilled aid before.  I begged doed grow allard.  I had allowed hib

such abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.
such abidard diebe; I thoughed he bied haved had ad ablebedge vid.

I looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner
I looked through the gee-hole; bud the door obing id ad odd korder

of the room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one.
oughe the roobe, the gee-hole prosbecked wahd bud a crooged ad chiedes whead.

I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall,
I cooled oldie see bard ohd the food-board ohd the bed ad a lied ohd the wall,

but nothing more.  I was surprised to behold resting against the wall
bud tothig boere.  I wahd surbrides doed behold redging aghaid the wall

the wooden shaft of Queequeg's harpoon, which the landlady the evening
the woode javed oeved Queeged harbood, which the laldid the evig

previous had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber.
previas had daged vrob hib, before our bouighed doed the chaber.

That's strange, thought I; but at any rate, since the harpoon
Thadge stread, thoughed I; bud ed aid reiged, chids the harbood

stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad without it,
staddes yoder, ad he celde or dever goeds abroad withowd id,

therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.
therefore he budged be inside here, ad doe bosuble midgek.




"Queequeg!--Queequeg!"--all still.  Something must
"Queed!--Queed!"--all stilled.  Sothedig budged

have happened.  Apoplexy!  I tried to burst open the door;
haved habbed.  Abpobledge!  I tried doed burged obed the door;

but it stubbornly resisted.  Running down stairs, I quickly
bud id stubberdle resided.  Ruhding dowed steares, I quiggley

stated my suspicions to the first person I met--the chamber-maid.
staided bied subsigiones doed the furged perzed I bed--the chaber-beyed.

"La! la!" she cried, "I thought something must be the matter.
"La! la!" she kride, "I thoughed sothedig budged be the bader.

I went to make the bed after breakfast, and the door was locked;
I wed doed baig the bed afder bregh-aved, ad the door wahd logged;

and not a mouse to be heard; and it's been just so silent ever since.
ad dod a mouge doed be heard; ad idge beed judged so chiled ever chid.

But I thought, may be, you had both gone off and locked your
Bud I thoughed, beyed be, you had bothed goed off ad logged your

baggage in for safe keeping.  La!  La, ma'am!--Mistress! murder!
baggage id for safe keebing.  La!  La, bahbe!--Midred! berder!

Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!"--and with these cries she ran towards
Beaud. Hussey! abpolbedge!"--ad with theeds krieds she raad toweded

the kitchen, I following.
the gidge, I followig.




Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand
Beaughe. Hussey tued abeard, with a busdered-bod id whid hadd

and a vinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away
ad a viedeg-krewed id the other, havig judged brogea away

from the occupation of attending to the castors, and scolding
vrob the auguabe ohd adteig doed the cazders, ad scoldig

her little black boy meantime.
her lidtle blagge boy beedeabe.




"Wood-house!" cried I, "which way to it?  Run for God's sake, and fetch
"Wood-house!" kride I, "which way doed id?  Ruhd for Gods chaig, ad fetch

something to pry open the door--the axe!--the axe! he's had a stroke;
sothedig doed bried obe the door--the agged!--the agged! heeds had a stroge;

depend upon it!"--and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs
debed oobed id!"--ad so ceige I wahd untodedged ruggi ub steares

again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and
agaid ebbed-hadded, wehd Beaughe. Hussey interboad the busdered-bod ad

vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her countenance.
videge-krewed, ad the endeid kazder ohd her coudeard.




"What's the matter with you, young man?"
"Whods the bader with you, yughed bahd?"




"Get the axe!  For God's sake, run for the doctor, some one,
"Ged the agged!  For Gods chaig, ruhd for the dochder, sub whid,

while I pry it open!"
while I bried id obe!"




"Look here," said the landlady, quickly putting down
"Looke here," said the laldid, quiggley puddigh dowed

the vinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free; "look here;
the viedeg-krewed, so aid doed haved whid hadd free; "looke here;

are you talking about prying open any of my doors?"--
are you tauging abough prieg obe aide ohd bied doores?"--

and with that she seized my arm.  "What's the matter with you?
ad with thad she seeded bied arbe.  "Whad's the bader with you?

What's the matter with you, shipmate?"
Whadge the bader with you, shibbed?"




In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand
Id aid gaab, bud rabbed a baher aid posgeble, I gave her doed uddersdand

the whole case.  Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet
the whole gaise.  Ungosted clabbing the videge-krewed

to one side of her nose, she ruminated for an instant;
doed whid side ohd her doed, she rubidated for ad idsted;

then exclaimed--"No! I haven't seen it since I put it there."
thed exglade--"Doe! I haved geed id chid I bud id there."

Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs, she glanced
Ruhding doed a lidtle clozd udder the laide ohd the steares, she gladged

in, and returning, told me that Queequeg's harpoon was missing.
id, ad redering, dold be thad Queeged harbood wahd bizg.

"He's killed himself," she cried.  "It's unfort'nate Stiggs done
"Heeds kild hibsulve," she kride.  "Idge unforded Stigges doed

over again there goes another counterpane--God pity his poor mother!--
over agaid there goeds authougher couderbaid--God bidy hidge boore bother!--

it will be the ruin of my house.  Has the poor lad a sister?
id will be the rued ohd bied house.  Had the boore lad a zidger?

Where's that girl?--there, Betty, go to Snarles the Painter,
Wears thad girl?--there, Beddy, go doed Schardel's the Paider,

and tell him to paint me a sign, with--"no suicides permitted here,
ad delle hib doed paid be a chied, with--"doe tuided perbided here,

and no smoking in the parlor;"--might as well kill both
ad doed scogieg id the parler;"--bied aid well gille bothed

birds at once.  Kill?  The Lord be merciful to his ghost!
birds ed ohde.  Gille?  The Lord be mergival doed hidge goedge!

What's that noise there?  You, young man, avast there!"
Whad's thad doid there?  You, yughed bahd, avad there!"




And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force
Ad ruhding ub afder be, she gaud be aid I wahd agaid dryig doed force

open the door.
obe the door.




"I won't allow it; I won't have my premises spoiled.
"I wohd allow id; I wohd haved bied brebises spoiled.

Go for the locksmith, there's one about a mile from here.  But avast!"
Go for the logsbith, theireds whid abough a biled vrob here.  Bud avad!"

putting her hand in her side pocket, "here's a key that'll fit, I guess;
puddigh her hadd id her side pogged, "heards a gee thadel vid, I guess;

let's see."  And with that, she turned it in the lock; but alas!
ledge see."  Ad with thad, she durde id id the log; bud alas!

Queequeg's supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within.
Queegeds sublibendar boeld rebaid aldwidhwed withed.




"Have to burst it open," said I, and was running down the entry
"Haved doed burged id obe," said I, ad wahd ruhding dowed the edrey

a little, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me,
a lidtle, for a good stard, wehd the laldedy gaud edge be,

again vowing I should not break down her premises; but I tore
agaed vowieg I should dod brege dowed her brebises; bud I doehered

from her, and with a sudden bodily rush dashed myself full
vrob her, ad with a cudde bodily rush dajed bizelve full

against the mark.
aghaid the barge.




With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob
With a pradidge doid the door flew obe, ad the tobbe

slamming against the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling;
slabing aghaid the wall, ced the plaiger doed the tielg;

and there, good heavens! there sat Queequeg, altogether cool
ad there, good heaves! there jad Queed, aldighter gooled

and self-collected; right in the middle of the room;
ad self-collegged; wried id the biddle ove the roobe;

squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on top of his head.
squadging ohd hidge habs, ad holde Yodo ohd dob ove hidge head.

He looked neither one way nor the other way but sat like a carved
He looked teither whead way doehered the other way bud chad digue a carved

image with scarce a sign of active life.
ibbed with schard a chied ohd aghidge life.




"Queequeg," said I, going up to him, "Queequeg, what's
"Queed," said I, goege ub doed hib, "Queed, whads

the matter with you?"
the bader with you?"




"He hain't been a sittin' so all day, has he?" said the landlady.
"He heyed beed a chide' so all day, had he?" said the laldid.




But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him;
Bud all we said, dod a word cooled we drag oud ohd hib;

I almost felt like pushing him over, so as to change his position,
I albosd feld digue pusge hib over, so aid doed jaed hidge bogished,

for it was almost intolerable, it seemed so painfully and
for id wahd albosd idholderble, id seebed so painvilly ad

unnaturally constrained; especially, as in all probability
undeardally cuasdread; hescheabley, aid id all brobbabiled

he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours,
he had beed cidding so for ubwards ohd eige or dehd oueds,

going too without his regular meals.
goege dued withowd hidge regular beeles.




"Mrs. Hussey," said I, "he's alive at all events; so leave us,
"Beaued. Hussey," said I, "heeds alvieve ed all eved; so leive us,

if you please, and I will see to this strange affair myself."
if you pleege, ad I will see doed this streded affair bizelve."




Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail
Clozig the door oobed the laldedy, I edvead doed prevele

upon Queequeg to take a chair; but in vain.  There he sat;
uboed Queed doed daig a chair; bud id veyed.  There he jad;

and all he could do--for all my polite arts and blandishments--
ad all he cooled do--for all bied bolled ardes ad blades--

he would not move a peg, nor say a single word, nor even look
he would dod bove a begge, dohered say a chigled word, doehered eved looke

at me, nor notice my presence in any the slightest way.
ed be, doehered todage bied presed id aid the sliged way.




I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan;
I wahder, thoughed I, if this gahd bosbilly be a bard ohd hidge Rabadan;

do they fast on their hams that way in his native island.
do they vasged ohd their habs thad way id hidge dadived eideled.

It must be so; yes, it's a part of his creed, I suppose;
Id budged be so; yes, idge a bard ohd hidge kriede, I chaboeds;

well, then, let him rest; he'll get up sooner or later, no doubt.
well, thed, led hib resged; he'll ged ub sueder or laider, doe doud.

It can't last for ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes
Id kahd lazd for ever, thag God, ad hidge Rabada's oldie coubs

once a year; and I don't believe it's very punctual then.
ohd a year; ad I doed belive idge vearey bugtwald thed.




I went down to supper.  After sitting a long time listening to the long
I wed dowed doed subber.  Afder cidding a laugh diebe ligiz doed the laugh

stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage,
stories ohd sub chailers who had judged koeb vrob a plub-puddig voyed,

as they called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig,
aid they gauled id (thad eighed, a jhord whilding-voyed id a guider or brig,

confined to the north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only);
convide doed the torthed ohd the lied, id the Adladge O'dea oldie);

after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o'clock, I
afder ligiz doed theeds plub-puddiers dilled dearley elvid oglog, I

went up stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by this time Queequeg
wed ub steares doed go doed bed, feelig quide sure by this diebe Queed

must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a termination.  But no;
budged churdied haved brouged hidge Rabadan doed a derbiadione.  Bud doe;

there he was just where I had left him; he had not stirred an inch.
there he wahd judged where I had leaved hib; he had dod stuerd ad id.

I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright senseless
I begged doed grow vegged with hib; id seebed so dowdride cezdles

and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his hams
ad is-dean doed be ciddig there all day ad half the died ohd hidge habs

in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his head.
i'd a koed roobe, holde a peege oughed wood ohd hidge head.




"For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and have
"For heaveds chaig, Queed, ged ub ad jhaig yourself; ged ub ad haved

some supper.  You'll starve; you'll kill yourself, Queequeg."  But not
sub subber.  You'll starve; you'll gille yourself, Queed."  Bud dod

a word did he reply.
a word did he rebley.




Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep;
Debsberg ohd hib, therefore, I dederbid doed go doed bed ad doed sliebe;

and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me.
ad doe doud, before a greed while, he would follow be.

But previous to turning in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket,
Bud previa's doed durding id, I dooke bied heavey burges jagged,

and threw it over him, as it promised to be a very cold night;
ad threwe id over hib, aid id probez doed be a vearey koed died;

and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on.
ad he had tothig bud hidge ordizary roued jagged ohd.

For some time, do all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze.
For sub diebe, do all I would, I cooled dod ged id the feided doeds.

I had blown out the candle; and the mere thought of Queequeg--
I had blowed oud the kadeled; ad the beared thoughed ohd Queed--

not four feet off--sitting there in that uneasy position,
dod four feed off--ciddig there id thad a'died bogished,

stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really wretched.
starge aloed id the koeld ad darge; this bayed be really wretched.

Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide
Thig ohd id; sleebing all deid id the chaibe roobe with a wide

awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!
awgage begged ohd hidge habs id this dreary, unaghoudable Rabada's!




But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till
Bud subheaud I drobbed off edge lazd, ad d'ead tothig boehed dilled

break of day; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted
brege ohd day; wehd, looking over the bedside, there squadd

Queequeg, as if he had been screwed down to the floor.
Queed, aids if he had beed screwed dowed doed the floor.

But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the window,
Bud aids tued aid the furged glibs ohd chud endered the widdow,

up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but with a cheerful look;
ub he god, with stive ad grading joided, bud with a cheerful looke;

limped towards me where I lay; pressed his forehead again
libbed toweded be where I lay; presged hidge forehead agaed

against mine; and said his Ramadan was over.
aghaid bied; ad said hidge Rabadan wahd over.




Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person's religion,
Doed, aid I before hidd, I haved doe abjecude doed aid perseds relidge,

be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult
be id whad id beyed, so laugh aide thad perzed doed dod gille or isduled

any other person, because that other person don't believe it also.
aid other perzed, begoed thad other perzed doed belive id also.

But when a man's religion becomes really frantic; when it is a positive
Bud wehd a bahds relidge begube really fradeg; wehd id eighed a podived

torment to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable
torbed doed hib; ad, id fied, bagues this hearth ohd ours ad ungombertable

inn to lodge in; then I think it high time to take that individual
id doed lodge id; thed I thig id high diebe doed daig thad iddividal

aside and argue the point with him.
aside ad argue the poid with hib.




And just so I now did with Queequeg.  "Queequeg," said I,
Ad judged so I doed did with Queed.  "Queed," said I,

"get into bed now, and lie and listen to me."  I then went on,
"ged id bed toed, ad lie ad lizde doed be."  I thed wed ohd,

beginning with the rise and progress of the primitive religions,
begid with the rieds ad progred ohd the pribidve religeds,

and coming down to the various religions of the present time,
ad koebing dowed doed the variage religeds ohd the presed diebe,

during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all
duerge which diebe I labored doed show Queed thad all

these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings in cold,
theeds Leaded, Rabads, ad prolodged hab-squadges id goeld,

cheerless rooms were stark nonsense; bad for the health;
tireles roobs were starge dazzead; bad for the heathed;

useless for the soul; opposed, in short, to the obvious laws
useless for the soul; abodes, id jhord, doed the obviage lauges

of Hygiene and common sense.  I told him, too, that he being
ohd Heide ad kahbed cezd.  I dold hib, dued, thad he beed

in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage,
id other thigs such ad egstreable cezzeble ad chagied cavidge,

it pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so deplorably
id paide be, vearey badly paide be, doed see hib doed so deblorably

foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his.  Besides, argued I,
foolish abough this ridigaled Rabadan oughe hidge.  Bedized, argued I,

fasting makes the body cave in; hence the spirit caves in;
fasding baiges the body gave id; head the speid gaves id;

and all thoughts born of a fast must necessarily be
ad all thodes board oeved a vasged budged desugerally be

half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic religionists
half-starved. This eighed the reegen why boedge disbettig relidest

cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters.
cherish such beladel noties aboud their hergivers.

In one word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively;
Id whid word, Queed, said I, rather digresivedly;

hell is an idea first born on an undigested apple-dumpling;
hell eyed ad idea furged board ohd ad uddidged abel-dubbling;

and since then perpetuated through the hereditary dyspepsias
ad chid thed perbeduaded through the herdidary dispeged

nurtured by Ramadans.
derged by Rabads.




I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia;
I thed asged Queed whether he hibsulve wahd ever troubeled with disbeage;

expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it in.
exbregis the idea veary plaied, so thad he cooled daig id id.

He said no; only upon one memorable occasion.  It was after a great feast
He said doed; oldey oobed whead beborable augased.  Id wahd afder a greed feedged

given by his father the king on the gaining of a great battle wherein
gived by hidge father the kig ohd the gaighed ohd a greed badele whered

fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two o'clock in the afternoon,
fidvey ohd the ehibe had beed kild by aboud dued oglog id the afderdood,

and all cooked and eaten that very evening.
ad all cooked ad eade thad veighe evig.




"No more, Queequeg," said I, shuddering; "that will do;"
"Doe boehed, Queed," said I, shuddirg; "thad will do;"

for I knew the inferences without his further hinting them.
for I d'ead the inveradses withowd hidge further hiddig theb.

I had seen a sailor who had visited that very island, and he told me
I had geed a sailor who had vidged thad veary eideled, ad he dold beg

that it was the custom, when a great battle had been gained there,
thad id wahd the cudsub, wehd a greed badle had beed gayde there,

to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden of the victor;
doed barbegue all the slaid id the yard or garde ohd the vigter;

and then, one by one, they were placed in great wooden trenchers,
ad thed, whid by whid, they were plaiged id greed woode dreaders,

and garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts;
ad gardized roude digue a pillow, with breadfrud ad coghoded;

and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent round with
ad with sub barzley id their bouthed, were cehd roued with

the victor's compliments to all his friends, just as though
the vigters coblebend doed all hidge friedd's, judged aid though

these presents were so many Christmas turkeys.
thieds presded were so baid Grisbed durgees.




After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made
Afder all, I do dod thig thad bied rebarges abough relidge baid

much impression upon Queequeg.  Because, in the first place,
bud imbrege uboed Queed.  Begoed, id the furged plaige,

he somehow seemed dull of hearing on that important subject,
he subhe seebed dull ohd hearing ohd thad imborded jubdegged,

unless considered from his own point of view; and, in the
alled condizder vrob hidge owed poid oeved viewe; ad, id the

second place, he did not more than one third understand me,
chegad plaige, he did dod boehed thad whid third uddersdand beege,

couch my ideas simply as I would; and, finally, he no doubt thought
couge bied ides sibpley aid I would; ad, fiedley, he doe doud thoughed

he knew a good deal more about the true religion than I did.
he dued a good deal boehed abough the drewe relidge thad I did.

He looked at me with a sort of condescending concern and compassion,
He looked ed be with a chord oeved godzadeds conderes ad capbage,

as though he thought it a great pity that such a sensible young
aids though he thoughed id a greed bidy thad such a cezzeble yughed

man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan piety.
bahd should be so holbley lodged doed evedelded begged pied.




At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
Ed lasd we roes ad dredged; ad Queed, daging a prodigedly hardie

breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not make
bregh-aved oeved chowders ohd all swardes, so thad the laldedy should dod beig

much profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod,
bud proved by reeges ohd hidge Rabadan, we salid oud doed board the Pegwed,

sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.
saughtering allog, ad piggi our teethed with halbod boedes.










CHAPTER 18
CHABTER 18




His Mark
Hidge Barge







As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship,
Aid we were walging dowed the ed oughe the wharf toweded the gib,

Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice
Queed garrieg hidge harbood, Cabted Bellig id hidge gruff voige

loudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected
loudly hailed us vrob hidge wigwable, ceige he had dod subsected

my friend was a cannibal, and furthermore announcing that he let
bied friede wahd a gandeble, ad vertherber alouding thad he led

no cannibals on board that craft, unless they previously
doe caldables ohd board thad gradved, alled they previedly

produced their papers.
produed their pabers.




"What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?" said I, now jumping
"Whad do you beed by thad, Cabted Bellig?" said I, towe jubbig

on the bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.
ohd the bullwarged, ad levig bied courbed stade ohd the wharf.




"I mean," he replied, "he must show his papers."
"I beed," he reblied, "he budged show hidge pabers."




"Yes," said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from
"Yes," said Cabted Bilded id hidge hollow voige, stigging hidge head vrob

behind Peleg's, out of the wigwam.  "He must show that he's converted.
behid Bellig's, oud oeved the wigwab.  "He budged show thad heeds converded.

Son of darkness," he added, turning to Queequeg, "art thou at present
Chaad ohd dargeas," he added, durding doed Queed, "ard thou ed presed

in communion with any Christian church?"
id camudized with aide Gridgea's church?"




"Why," said I, "he's a member of the first Congregational Church."
"Why," said I, "heeds a bebber ohd the furged Cogrigated Church."

Here be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket
Here be id said, thad baid dadude cavages chailg id Dadicked

ships at last come to be converted into the churches.
ghibbes ed lazd coub doed be converded id the jurged.




"First Congregational Church," cried Bildad, "what! that worships
"Furged Cogrigationed Church," kride Bilded, "whad! thad worgebes

in Deacon Deuteronomy Coleman's meeting-house?" and so saying,
id Degaed Duderobels Golbes meedig-house?" ad so ceige,

taking out his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow
daging oud hidge spectagels, he rubbed theb with hidge greed yellow

bandana handkerchief, and putting them on very carefully,
badata haggerieve, ad puddigh theb ohd vearey garevilly,

came out of the wigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks,
gabe oud ove the wigwable, ad leighe stively over the bullwargs,

took a good long look at Queequeg.
dooke a good laugh looke ed Queed.




"How long hath he been a member?" he then said, turning to me;
"How laugh hathed he beed a bebber?" he thed said, durding doed be;

"not very long, I rather guess, young man."
"dod veary laugh, I rather guess, yughed bahd."




"No," said Peleg, "and he hasn't been baptized right either,
"Doe," said Belleg, "ad he hazd beed babtides wride either,

or it would have washed some of that devil's blue off his face."
or id would haved wadged sub ohd thad deviles blue off hidge face."




"Do tell, now," cried Bildad, "is this Philistine a regular member
"Do delle, doed," kride Bilded, "eighed this Villedseed a regular bebber

of Deacon Deuteronomy's meeting?  I never saw him going there,
ohd Degaed Duderobeled meeding?  I dever saw hib goege there,

and I pass it every Lord's day."
ad I baz id every Lords day."




"I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,"
"I doed doed aethidge aboud Degaed Duderobels or hidge meeding,"

said I; "all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the
said I; "all I doed eyed, thad Queed here eighed a board bebber ohd the

First Congregational Church.  He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is."
Furged Cogrigationed Church.  He eyed a degaed hibsulve, Queed eighed."




"Young man," said Bildad sternly, "thou art skylarking with me--
"Yughed bahd," said Bilded stearde, "thou ard skylarging with be--

explain thyself, thou young Hittite.  What church dost thee
exblayed thyself, thou yughed Hidd.  Whad church dodged thee

mean? answer me."
beed? asder be."




Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied, "I mean, sir, the same
Fiding bizlev thus hard pudged, I reblied, "I beed, sir, the chaibe

ancient Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there,
aighead Catholdig Church doed which you ad I, ad Cabted Bellig there,

and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother's son and soul
ad Queed here, ad all ove us, ad every bothers chaad ad soul

of us belong; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this
ove us bellog; the greed ad everlaged Furged Congregated ohd this

whole worshipping world; we all belong to that; only some of us
whole worgibe world; we all bellog doed thad; oldie sub ove us

cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief;
cherish sub queed crodged doe waige tudge the grad belief;

in that we all join hands."
id thad we all joid handes."




"Splice, thou mean'st splice hands," cried Peleg, drawing nearer.
"Spliege, thou beads spliege handes," kride Bellig, drawig dearer.

"Young man, you'd better ship for a missionary,
"Yughed bahd, you'd beder gib for a migiary,

instead of a fore-mast hand; I never heard a better sermon.
idsded ohd a fore-bazd hadd; I dever heard a beder cerbed.

Deacon Deuteronomy--why Father Mapple himself couldn't beat it,
Degaed Duderobels--why Father Babble hibsulve kouded beed id,

and he's reckoned something.  Come aboard, come aboard:
ad heedge regged sothedig.  Cobe aboard, coeb aboard:

never mind about the papers.  I say, tell Quohog there--
dever bied aboud the pabers.  I say, delle Quoge there--

what's that you call him? tell Quohog to step along.
whadge thad you gall hib? dehled Quoge doed steb allog.

By the great anchor, what a harpoon he's got there! looks
By the greed agher, whad a harbood heeds god there! loogs

like good stuff that; and he handles it about right.
digue good stub thad; ad he haddles id aboud wried.

I say, Quohog, or whatever your name is, did you ever stand
I say, Quoge, or whadever your daibe eighed, did you ever sdad

in the head of a whale-boat? did you ever strike a fish?"
id the head ohd a whale-boed? did you ever strige a fish?"




Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon
Withowd ceig a word, Queed, id hidge wild chord ohd way, jubbed oobed

the bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging
the bullwargs, vrob theid id the boese oeved whid ove the whale-boedes hagge

to the side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon,
doed the side; ad thed braiging hidge leaved deed, ad boised hidge harbood,

cried out in some such way as this:--
kride oud id sub such way aid this:--




"Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere?  You see him? well,
"Kabid, you see hib schaule drob dahr ohd wader deared?  You see hib? well,

spose him one whale eye, well, den!" and taking sharp aim at it,
spoeds hib whad whale eye, well, dehd!" ad daging gharbe aib ed id,

he darted the iron right over old Bildad's broad brim, clean across
he darded the eyed wried over old Bildeds broad brib, gleed agroage

the ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight.
the ghibbes degge, ad sdrug the glidsing dahr spod oud ove chide.




"Now," said Queequeg, quietly, hauling in the line, "spos-ee him
"Doed," said Queed, quidely, haulig id the lied, "schod-ee hib

whale-e eye; why, dad whale dead."
whale-e eye; why, dad whale dead."




"Quick, Bildad," said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close
"Quig, Bilded," said Bellig, hidge parder, who, adgad ed the gloeds

vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway.
vigidi ohd the flieg harbood, had redried toweded the gabbed gagwed.

"Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship's papers.
"Quig, I say, you Bilded, ad ged the ghibs pabers.

We must have Hedgehog there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats.
We budged haved Hedgehog there, I beed Quoge, id whad ove our boedes.

Look ye, Quohog, we'll give ye the ninetieth lay, and that's more
Looke ye, Quoge, we'll gived ye the dideazed lay, ad thadge boehed

than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket."
thad ever wahd gived a harbouide yed oud ohd Dadicked."




So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon
So dowed we wed id the gabbed, ad doed bied greed joy Queed wahd tued

enrolled among the same ship's company to which I myself belonged.
erdoled abog the chaibe ghibs cobbee doed which I bizelve belaudged.




When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready
Wehd all brelibideries were over ad Bellig had god everidhed ready

for signing, he turned to me and said, "I guess, Quohog there don't
for chideg, he durde doed beg ad said, "I guess, Quoge there doed

know how to write, does he?  I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign
doed how doed wried, doed he?  I say, Quoge, blazd ye! dodged thou chied

thy name or make thy mark?
thy daibe or baig thy barge?




But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken
Bud ed this quezged, Queed, who had dwige or thriedge before daged

part in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking
bard id cibler chere-boandies, looked doe waiges abaged; bud daging

the offered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place,
the offered behd, cobbed oobed the paber, id the prober plaige,

an exact counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed
ad eggad couderbard ohd a queed roude figure which wahd dadude

upon his arm; so that through Captain Peleg's obstinate mistake
uboed hidge arbe; so thad through Cabted Bellig's obduzd midgek

touching his appellative, it stood something like this:--
dudge hidge abledage, id stood sothedig digue this:--

Quohog.
Quoge.

his X mark.
hidge EDGE barge.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg,
Beaweid Cabted Bilded jad erdestled ad tdeadfidgly i'd Queed,

and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets
ad ed lazd rigis solebed ad fubbling id the huge pogged

of his broadskirted drab coat took out a bundle of tracts,
ohd hidge broad-deard drab coed dooke oud a buddell ohd tragged,

and selecting one entitled "The Latter Day Coming; or No Time
ad celegting whid endidled "The Lader Day Koebing; or Doed Diebe

to Lose," placed it in Queequeg's hands, and then grasping them
doed Loeds," plaiged id id Queeged handes, ad thed grasbing theb

and the book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and said,
ad the boog with bothed hidge, looked erdestled id hidge ige, ad said,

"Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner
"Chaad ove dargeas, I budged do bied dued by thee; I aigh bard oher

of this ship, and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew;
ove this gib, ad feel condered for the jules ohd all idd grewe;

if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear,
if thou stilled klieds doed thy Begged waiges, which I sadly fear,

I beseech thee, remain not for aye a Belial bondsman.
I beseech thee, rebayed dod for aye a Belied bodsbald.

Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the wrath
Spurd the idol Bell, ad the hideous draged; durd vrob the wrathed

to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer
doed coub; bied thied eye, I say; oh! goodes gracious! steed

clear of the fiery pit!"
cleared ohd the fiery bid!"




Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's language,
Sothedig ohd the chauled sea yed lighed id old Bildeds laghded,

heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.
hederadsted bigged with Scriptural ad debezde frazes.




"Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,
"Avad there, avad there, Bilded, avad doed spoilig our harbouide,

cried Peleg.  "Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers--
kride Bellig.  "Baiad harbouides dever baig good voyders--

it takes the shark out of 'em; no harpooneer is worth a straw
id dages the jharge oud ohd 'eb; doe harbouide eyed worthed a strauge

who aint pretty sharkish.  There was young Nat Swaine,
who aid predgy shargisge.  There wahd yughed Dad Swaid,

once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and
ohd the braved boed-header oud ohd all Dadicked ad

the Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never came to good.
the Vighted; he joid the meeding, ad dever gabe doed good.

He got so frightened about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked
He god so frided aboud hidge plagge soul, thad he shrigged

and sheered away from whales, for fear of after-claps, in case
ad sheede away vrob whaleds, for fear oeved afder-clabs, id gaise

he got stove and went to Davy Jones."
he god stove ad wed doed Davey Joedes."




"Peleg!  Peleg!" said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands,
"Belleg!  Bellig!" said Bilded, lifdig hidge ige ad hands,

"thou thyself, as I myself, hast seen many a perilous time;
"thou thyself, aid I bizelve, hadged geed baid a peridals dibe;

thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to have the fear of death;
thou towed, Bellig, whad id eyed doed haved the fear ohd deidh;

how, then, can'st thou prate in this ungodly guise.
how, thed, kahd thou praid id this uddley gge.

Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg.  Tell me, when this same Pequod
Thou belidged thied oud heard, Bellig.  Delle be, wehd this chaibe Pegwed

here had her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan,
here had her thried balds overboard id thad divewed ohd Dhabed,

that same voyage when thou went mate with Captain Ahab,
thad chaibe voyed wehd thou wed baid with Cabted Ahab,

did'st thou not think of Death and the Judgment then?"
didd thou dod thig ohd Deidh ad the Judbid thed?"




"Hear him, hear him now," cried Peleg, marching across the cabin,
"Hear hib, hear hib doed," kride Belleg, bardig agroage the gabbed,

and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,--"hear him, all of ye.
ad thrudged hidge hands far dowed id hidge pogged,--"hear hib, all ohd ye.

Think of that!  When every moment we thought the ship would sink!
Thig ohd thad!  Wehd every boebed we thoughed the gib would chig!

Death and the Judgment then?  What?  With all three masts making such
Deathe ad the Judbed thed?  Whad?  With all thried bads beiging such

an everlasting thundering against the side; and every sea breaking
ad everlaged thueddeig aghaid the side; ad every sea breggie

over us, fore and aft.  Think of Death and the Judgment then?
over us, fore ad agved.  Thig oeved Deethed ad the Judbid thed?

No! no time to think about Death then.  Life was what Captain Ahab
Doed! doed diebe doed thig abowed Deethed thed.  Life wahd whad Cabted Ahab

and I was thinking of; and how to save all hands how to rig jury-masts
ad I wahd thiggi ohd; ad how doed save all handes how doed rig jury-bads

how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was thinking of."
how doed ged id the deared pord; thad wahd whad I wahd thiggi ohd."




Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck,
Bilded said doed boere, bud buttig ub hidge coed, stauged ohd degge,

where we followed him.  There he stood, very quietly overlooking
where we followed hib.  There he stood, veary quiedley overlooging

some sailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist.
sub cealbeggers who were bedig a dob-sail id the waiged.

Now and then he stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end
Doed ad thed he stubed doed pig ub a padge, or save ad ed

of tarred twine, which otherwise might have been wasted.
oeved dard twied, which otherwides bied haved beed wasded.










CHAPTER 19
CHABTER 19




The Prophet
The Proved







"Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?"
"Shibbades, haved ye shipped id thad gib?"




Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away
Queeged ad I had judged leaved the Pegwed, ad were saughtering away

from the water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts,
vrob the wader, for the boebed each oggiped with hidge owed thodes,

when the above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us,
wehd the above words were bud doed us by a straide, who, bosge before us,

levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question.
leveled hidge bazive forgibed ed the vegell id quedged.

He was but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers;
He wahd bud shabbley aphered id faded jagged ad padged drougers;

a rag of a black handkerchief investing his neck.  A confluent
a rag ove a blagge haggerieve invesdig hidge degge.  A colveaud

smallpox had in all directions flowed over his face, and left it
slaulbagged had id all deregutes flowed over hidge face, ad leaved id

like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing
digue the cobligated ribbed bed ohd a tored, wehd the ruggi

waters have been dried up.
waders haved beed dried ub.




"Have ye shipped in her?" he repeated.
"Haved ye shipped id her?" he rebead.




"You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose," said I, trying to gain
"You beed the gib Pegwed, I caboes," said I, dryig doed gayed

a little more time for an uninterrupted look at him.
a lidtle boere diebe for ad uniderbed looke ed hib.




"Aye, the Pequod--that ship there," he said, drawing back his whole
"Aye, the Pegwed--thad gib there," he said, drawig bagge hidge whole

arm and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him-, with the fixed
arb ad thed rebbidly chovig id straid oud vrob hib-, with the figged

bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object.
bayed oeved hidge boided figger darded full ed the objedg.




"Yes," said I, "we have just signed the articles."
"Yes," said I, "we haved judged chide the ardigles."




"Anything down there about your souls?"
"Aethidge dowed there aboud your jools?"




"About what?"
"Aboud whad?"




"Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any," he said quickly.
"Oh, perghabed you haved god aid," he said quiggley.

"No matter though, I know many chaps that hav'n't got any,--
"Doe bader though, I toed baid jabs thad haved god aide,--

good luck to 'em; and they are all the better off for it.
good lug doed 'eb; ad they are all the beder off for id.

A soul's a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon."
A tuelds a sord ohd a fived wheel doed a wagged."




"What are you jabbering about, shipmate?" said I.
"Whad are you jabberg aboud, shibbed?" said I.




"He's got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies
"Heeds god ehaud, though, doed baig ub for all divigiads

of that sort in other chaps," abruptly said the stranger,
ove thad sord id other jabs," abrubled said the straide,

placing a nervous emphasis upon the word he.
plaiging a dervage evevages uboed the word he.




"Queequeg," said I, "let's go; this fellow has broken loose
"Queed," said I, "ledge go; this fellow had brogaed loose

from somewhere; he's talking about something and somebody
vrob subhwer; heeds tauging aboud sothedig ad subbody

we don't know."
we doed doed."




"Stop!" cried the stranger.  "Ye said true--ye hav'n't seen
"Stob!" kride the straide.  "Ye said drewe--ye haved geed

Old Thunder yet, have ye?"
Old Thueder yed, haved ye?"




"Who's Old Thunder?" said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness
"Whoeds Old Thueder?" said I, agaed riveded with the is-deard erdsted

of his manner.
ove hidge baher.




"Captain Ahab."
"Cabted Ahab."




"What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?"
"Whad! the cabted oeved our gib, the Pegwed?"




"Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name.
"Aye, abogh sub ohd us old sailor jabs, he goeds by thad daib.

Ye hav'n't seen him yet, have ye?"
Ye haved geed hib yed, haved ye?"




"No, we hav'n't. He's sick they say, but is getting better,
"Doe, we haved. Heedge cig they say, bud eighed gedging beder,

and will be all right again before long."
ad will be all wried agaid before laugh."




"All right again before long!" laughed the stranger, with a solemnly
"All wried agaid before laugh!" lauded the straide, with a soleds

derisive sort of laugh.  "Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right,
deridve chord ohd laugh.  "Looke ye; wehd Cabted Ahab eighed all wried,

then this left arm of mine will be all right; not before."
thed this leaved arbe ohd bied will be all wried; dod before."




"What do you know about him?"
"Whad do you doed aboud hib?"




"What did they tell you about him?  Say that!"
"Whad did they delle you abough hib?  Say thad!"




"They didn't tell much of anything about him; only I've heard that he's
"They didde delle bud oughe aethidge aboud hib; olde Ive heard thad heedge

a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew."
a good whale-hueder, ad a good cabted doed hidge grewe."




"That's true, that's true--yes, both true enough.
"Thadge drewe, thadge drewe--yes, bothed drewe ehaud.

But you must jump when he gives an order.  Step and growl;
Bud you budged jubb wehd he gived ad order.  Steb ad growl;

growl and go--that's the word with Captain Ahab.  But nothing
growl ad go--thadge the word with Cabted Ahab.  Bud tothig

about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn, long ago,
abough thad thig thad habbed doed hib off Gabe Hored, laugh ago,

when he lay like dead for three days and nights; nothing about
wehd he lay lige dead for thried dais ad diede; tothig aboud

that deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa?--
thad deadly scribbed with the Spadiered avored the aldare id Chahde?--

heard nothing about that, eh?  Nothing about the silver calabash
heard tottig abough thad, eh?  Tothig abowed the cilver galabage

he spat into?  And nothing about his losing his leg last voyage,
he spad id?  Ad tothig abough hidge lozig hidge leg lazd voyed,

according to the prophecy.  Didn't ye hear a word about them
acgordig doed the provey.  Didde ye hear a word aboud theb

matters and something more, eh?  No, I don't think ye did;
badders ad sothedig boehed, eh?  Doe, I doed thig ye did;

how could ye?  Who knows it?  Not all Nantucket, I guess.
how cooled ye?  Who doeds id?  Dod all Dadached, I guess.

But hows'ever, mayhap, ye've heard tell about the leg,
Bud hoezver, baybed, yeave heard dehled aboud the leg,

and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard of that, I dare say.
ad how he lodged id; aye, ye haved heard ohd thad, I dare say.

Oh, yes, that every one knows a'most--I mean they know he's
Oh, yes, thad every whid doeds obozd--I beed they doed heeds

only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off."
oldie whead leg; ad thad a parbadetti dooke the other off."




"My friend," said I, "what all this gibberish of yours
"Bied freid," said I, "whad all this gibberish oeved yourds

is about, I don't know, and I don't much care; for it seems
eighed abough, I doed doed, ad I doed bud gaere; for id ceebs

to me that you must be a little damaged in the head.
doed be thad you budged be a lidtle dabid id the head.

But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab, of that ship there,
Bud if you are speeging ohd Cabted Ahab, ove thad gib there,

the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about the loss
the Pegwed, thed led be delle you, thad I doed all abough the loss

of his leg."
oeved hidge leg."




"All about it, eh--sure you do? all?
"All aboud id, eh--sure you do? all?




"Pretty sure."
"Predgy sure."




With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like
With figger boided ad eye leveled ed the Pegwed, the beggar-ligue

stranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting
straide stood a boebed, aid if id a troubeled revery; thed starding

a little, turned and said:--"Ye've shipped, have ye?  Names down on
a lidtle, durde ad said:--"Yeave shipped, haved ye?  'aibed dowed ohd

the papers?  Well, well, what's signed, is signed; and what's to be,
the pabers?  Well, well, whadge chide, eighed chide; ad whadge doed be,

will be; and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all.  Any how,
will be; ad thed agaed, perghabed id wohd be, afder all.  Aid how,

it's all fixed and arranged a'ready; and some sailors or other must go
idge all figged ad ardid ardied; ad sub chailers or other budged go

with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men, God pity 'em!
with hib, I caboes; aids well theeds aid aid other behed, God bidy 'eb!

Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye;
Bording doed ye, shibbades, bording; the inevible heaves bless ye;

I'm sorry I stopped ye."
Ibe sorry I stobbed ye."




"Look here, friend," said I, "if you have anything important to tell us,
"Looke here, freed," said I, "if you haved aethidge ibborded doed dehled us,

out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are mistaken
oud with id; bud if you are oldie dryig doed babudes us, you are mighdeged

in your game; that's all I have to say."
id your gabe; thadge all I haved doed say."




"And it's said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up
"Ad idge said veary well, ad I digue doed hear a jab tog ub

that way; you are just the man for him--the likes of ye.
thad way; you are judged the bahd for hib--the liges ohd ye.

Morning to ye, shipmates, morning!  Oh! when ye get there,
Bording doed ye, shibbades, bording!  Oh! wehd ye ged there,

tell 'em I've concluded not to make one of 'em."
dehled 'eb Ive congluded dod doed beig whid ove 'eb."




"Ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way--you can't fool us.
"Ah, bied dear fellow, you kahd fool us thad way--you kahd fool us.

It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had
Id eyed the eaged thig id the world for a bahd doed looke aid if he had

a great secret in him."
a greed cegred id hib."




"Morning to ye, shipmates, morning."
"Bording doed ye, shibbades, bording."




"Morning it is," said I. "Come along, Queequeg, let's leave this
"Bording id eighed," said I. "Koeb allog, Queed, ledge leive this

crazy man.  But stop, tell me your name, will you?"
crazey bahd.  Bud stob, delle be your daib, will you?"




"Elijah."
"Elijah."




Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting,
Elijah! thod I, ad we walged away, bothed caleding,

after each other's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor;
afder each others fashed, oobed this ragged old sailor;

and agreed that he was nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear.
ad agreed thad he wahd tothig bud a hubbed, dryig doed be a bugbear.

But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing
Bud we had dod goed perghabed abeve a hudded yards, wehd jahzge

to turn a corner, and looking back as I did so, who should be seen
doed durd a korder, ad looking bagge aids I did so, who should be geed

but Elijah following us, though at a distance.  Somehow, the sight
bud Elijah folloig us, though ed a disdaed.  Subhew, the chide

of him struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his
ohd hib sdrug be so, thad I said tottig doed Queed oeved hidge

being behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see
beed behid, bud pasged ohd with bied courbed, agged doed see

whether the stranger would turn the same corner that we did.
whether the straide would durd the chaibe korder thad we did.

He did; and then it seemed to me that he was dogging us,
He did; ad thed id seebed doed be thad he wahd dogging us,

but with what intent I could not for the life of me imagine.
bud with whad idted I cooled dod for the life ove be ibadied.

This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting,
This chirgusband, cubbed with hidge abiguad, half-hiddig,

half-revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all
half-revieling, shrouded sord ove taug, toed begged id be all

kinds of vague wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all
kidds ohd vagued woederbained ad half-abreheadsed, ad all

connected with the Pequod; and Captain Ahab; and the leg
gaedegd with the Pegwed; ad Cabted Ahab; ad the leg

he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver calabash;
he had lodged; ad the Cabe Hored vid; ad the cilver gallage;

and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship
ad whad Cabted Bellig had said ohd hib, wehd I leaved the gib

the day previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig;
the day previas; ad the brediguated ove the squad Didged;

and the voyage we had bound ourselves to sail; and a hundred
ad the voyed we had boued orselved doed sail; ad a hudded

other shadowy things.
other shadowy thigs.




I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was
I wahd resolved doed sadesgie bizelve whether this ragged Elijah wahd

really dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way
really dogging us or dod, ad with thad idted croeded the way

with Queequeg, and on that side of it retraced our steps.
with Queed, ad ohd thad side ohd id redraged our stebbes.

But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice us.
Bud Elijah pasged ohd, withowd ceibing doed todage us.

This relieved me; and once more, and finally as it seemed to me,
This relieved beigh; ad ohde boehed, ad fiedley aids id seebed doed be,

I pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.
I prodounds hib id bied heard, a hubbed.










CHAPTER 20
CHABTER 20




All Astir
All Auged







A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard
A day or dued pasged, ad there wahd greed aghidved aboard

the Pequod.  Not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails
the Pegwed.  Dod oldie were the old chailes beed bedded, bud doe chailes

were coming on board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging;
were coebing ohd board, ad bolds ohd calvas, ad goiles ohd rigging;

in short, everything betokened that the ship's preparations were
id jhord, everithed betoged thad the ghibs brebarages were

hurrying to a close.  Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore,
hurrieg doed a gloeds.  Cabted Bellig celde or dever wed ashore,

but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands:
bud chad id hidge wigwab keebing a gharbe looke-oud oobed the handes:

Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores;
Bilded did all the purgize ad providge ed the stoerge;

and the men employed in the hold and on the rigging were working
ad the behd ebloid id the hold ad ohd the rigging were werging

till long after night-fall.
dilled laugh afder died-fall.




On the day following Queequeg's signing the articles,
Ohd the day folloig Queegeds chideg the ardigled,

word was given at all the inns where the ship's company
word wahd gived ed all the i'd where the ghibs cobbee

were stopping, that their chests must be on board before night,
were stopbing, thad their jedged budged be ohd board before died,

for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be sailing.
for there wahd doe dellig how tued the vegelle bied be chailg.

So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, however, to sleep
So Queeged ad I god dowed our trabs, resovilg, howver, doed sleebe

ashore till the last.  But it seems they always give very long
ashore dilled the lasd.  Bud id ceebs they always gived veary laugh

notice in these cases, and the ship did not sail for several days.
todage id theeds kazed, ad the gib did dod sail for ceverel dais.

But no wonder; there was a good deal to be done, and there is
Bud doed wahder; there wahd a good deal doed be doed, ad there eighed

no telling how many things to be thought of, before the Pequod
doe delig how baid thigs doed be thoughed ohd, before the Begwed

was fully equipped.
wahd fully equibed.




Every one knows what a multitude of things--beds, sauce-pans, knives
Every whid does whad a bultidued ohd thigs--bedges, sauce-bazd, dives

and forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not,
ad forges, jhovel's ad tawges, dabkeds, dud-kraggers, ad whad dod,

are indispensable to the business of housekeeping.  Just so with whaling,
are iddisbulde doed the bizdell ohd hougegeebing.  Judged so with whilding,

which necessitates a three-years' housekeeping upon the wide ocean,
which resegited a thried-years' hougegeebing uboed the wide o'dea,

far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers.
far vrob all groegers, coutzburdes, docgers, bagers, ad bagkers.

And though this also holds true of merchant vessels, yet not by any means
Ad though this also holds drewe ohd berded vegils, yed dod by aide beedes

to the same extent as with whalemen.  For besides the great length
doed the chaibe egged aid with whelbead.  For bedized the greed legted

of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution
ohd the whilding voyed, the duberad ardigled peguliar doed the prosugutiage

of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote
ohd the fishery, ad the ibbobilde ohd replaging theb ed the reboed

harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of all ships,
harbers ugiald freegued, id budged be rebesberd, thad ohd all ghibs,

whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds,
whilding vegils are the bodge exboad doed aghdided ohd all kiddes,

and especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon
ad hajsheably doed the destrucged ad loss ohd the veary thigs oobed

which the success of the voyage most depends.  Hence, the spare boats,
which the chugzed ohd the voyed boedge debed.  Head, the sbeared boedes,

spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings,
sbeared spars, ad sbeared lieds ad harboods, ad sbeared everidhed,

almost, but a spare Captain and duplicate ship.
albosd, bud a sbeared Cabted ad dubliged gib.




At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage
Ed the perid ove our arviled ed the Eidel, the heavied stored

of the Pequod had been almost completed; comprising her beef,
ove the Pegwed had beed albosd combled; cobrizing her beef,

bread, water, fuel, and iron hoops and staves.  But, as before hinted,
bread, wader, fuel, ad eighed hoobs ad staveds.  Bud, aid before hidd,

for some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board
for sub diebe there wahd a kudiduars fedge ad garrieg ohd board

of divers odds and ends of things, both large and small.
ove divers odde ad edde ohd thigs, bothed large ad schalle.




Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was
Chief abogh thoeds who did this fedge ad garrieg wahd

Captain Bildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most determined
Cabted Bildeds zidger, a leed old lady ove a bodge dederbead

and indefatigable spirit, but withal very kindhearted, who seemed
ad idevidable spied, bud witheled veary giddredged, who seebed

resolved that, if she could help it, nothing should be found
resolved thad, if she cooled helbe id, tottig should be foud

wanting in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to sea.
wated id the Pegwed, afder ohd fairly gedging doed sea.

At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles
Ed whead diebe she would koeb ohd board with a jar ohd piggles

for the steward's pantry; another time with a bunch of
for the stward's badrey; autougher diebe with a budd oeved

quills for the chief mate's desk, where he kept his log;
quilds for the chief baides degge, where he kebbed hidge log;

a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one's
a third diebe with a roll ohd fladel for the schaule ohd sub wo'ds

rheumatic back.  Never did any woman better deserve her name,
rubaded bagge.  Dever did aid wobe's beder deverve her daibe,

which was Charity--Aunt Charity, as everybody called her.
which wahd Ghardied--Odd Ghardied, aide evebody gauled her.

And like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity
Ad digue a zidger ohd ghardied did this geridable Od Ghardied

bustle about hither and thither, ready to turn her hand and heart
bustle aboud hither ad thither, ready doed durd her hadd ad heard

to anything that promised to yield safety, comfort, and consolation
doed aethidge thad prabas doed yield saved, comvered, ad consulage

to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad
doed all ohd board a gib id which her beloved brother Bilded

was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two
wahd condered, ad id which she herself oude a squard or dued

of well-saved dollars.
ohd well-saved doller's.




But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress
Bud id wahd starding doed see this eggelde harded Quagered

coming on board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle
koebing ohd board, aid she did the lasd day, with a laugh oil-ladle

in one hand, and a still longer whaling lance in the other.
id whid hadd, ad a stilled laugher whilding lasd id the other.

Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all backward.
Doehered wahd Bilded hibsulve doere Cabted Belleg ed all bagward.

As for Bildad, he carried about with him a long list
Aids for Bilded, he kardied aboud with hib a laugh lied

of the articles needed, and at every fresh arrival,
ohd the ardigles deeded, ad ed every fresh arviled,

down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper.
dowed wed hidge barge obized thad ardigle oobed the paber.

Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den,
Every ohd id a while Belleg gabe hobbling oud ohd hidge whelbowed dehd,

roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the
roehig ed the behd dowed the hadgeweds, roehig ub doed the

riggers at the mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back
riggers ed the bazd-head, ad thed congluded by roaring bagge

into his wigwam.
id hidge wigwable.




During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited
Durig theeds dais ohd brebarage, Queed ad I ofted vidged

the craft, and as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was,
the graved, ad aid ofted I asged aboud Cabted Ahab, ad how he wahd,

and when he was going to come on board his ship.  To these questions
ad wehd he wahd goege doed koeb ohd board hidge gib.  Doed thieds quedgeands

they would answer, that he was getting better and better, and was
they would aswer, thad he wahd gedging beder ad beder, ad wahd

expected aboard every day; meantime, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad,
exbected aboard every day; beedeabe, the dued Cabtes, Bellge ad Bilded,

could attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage.
gooled added doed everidhed dezgeri doed vid the vegell for the voyed.

If I had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen
If I had beed dowdride ohdes with bizelve, I would haved geed

very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed
veighe plaidley id bied heard thad I did bud half vazgee beed cabided

this way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man
this way doed so laugh a voyed, withowd ohde leig bied ige ohd the bahd

who was to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship
who wahd doed be the absleaud digtader ohd id, so tued aid the gib

sailed out upon the open sea.  But when a man suspects any wrong,
sailed oud uboed the obe sea.  Bud wehd a bahd subsect's aid wrog,

it sometimes happens that if he be already involved in the matter,
id subdieds habbes thad if he be already ivvold id the bader,

he insensibly strives to cover up his suspicions even from himself.
he inseabley strives doed cover ub hidge subsigions eved vrob hibsulve.

And much this way it was with me.  I said nothing, and tried
Ad bud this way id wahd with be.  I said tothig, ad tried

to think nothing.
doed thig tothig.




At last it was given out that some time next day the ship
Ed lazd id wahd gived oud thad sub diebe deghd day the gib

would certainly sail.  So next morning, Queequeg and I took
would churdied sail.  So deghd bording, Queed ad I dooke

a very early start.
a vearey early stard.










CHAPTER 21
CHABTER 21




Going Aboard
Goege Aboard







It was nearly six o'clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn,
Id wahd dearley zigged oglog, bud oldie grey ibperged midgee daude,

when we drew nigh the wharf.
wehd we drew deigh the wharf.




"There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,"
"There are sub chailers ruhding ahead there, if I see wried,"

said I to Queequeg, "it can't be shadows; she's off by sunrise,
said I doed Queed, "id gad be shadows; gieds off by chardies,

I guess; come on!"
I guess; coub ohd!"




"Avast!" cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming
"Avad!" kride a voige, whoeds oher ed the chaibe diebe koebing

close behind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then
gloeds behid us, laid a hadd oobed bothed our showber's, ad thed

insinuating himself between us, stood stooping forward a little,
izhiduaged hibsulve bedweed us, stood stubig forward a lidtle,

in the uncertain twilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me.
id the underade twilde, straidley pearig vrob Queed doed be.

It was Elijah.
Id wahd Elijah.




"Going aboard?"
"Goege aboard?"




"Hands off, will you," said I.
"Handes off, will you," said I.




"Lookee here," said Queequeg, shaking himself, "go 'way!"
"Luegee here," said Queed, shagieng hibsulve, "go 'way!"




"Aint going aboard, then?"
"Aid goege aboard, thed?"




"Yes, we are," said I, "but what business is that of yours?
"Yes, we are," said I, "bud whad budzed eighed thad ohd yourds?

Do you know, Mr. Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?"
Do you doed, Beaud. Elijah, thad I kondizer you a lidtle ibberdand?"




"No, no, no; I wasn't aware of that," said Elijah, slowly and wonderingly
"Doe, doe, doe; I wazde aware ohd thad," said Elijah, slowly ad woedersbell

looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable glances.
looking vrob be doed Queed, with the boedge unaghoudable glads.




"Elijah," said I, "you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing.
"Elijah," said I, "you will oblige bied friede ad be by withdrawidge.

We are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer
We are goege doed the Idde ad Pajivig O'dheard, ad would prever

not to be detained."
dod doed be dedaid."




"Ye be, be ye?  Coming back afore breakfast?"
"Ye be, be ye?  Koebing bagge avored breghdas?"




"He's cracked, Queequeg," said I, "come on."
"Heeds cragged, Queed," said I, "koeb ohd."




"Holloa!" cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed
"Hollow!" kride stegiary Elijah, hailge us wehd we had revoved

a few paces.
a few paiges.




"Never mind him," said I, "Queequeg, come on."
"Dever biede hib," said I, "Queed, koeb ohd."




But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand
Bud he stoeld ub doed us agaed, ad suddley clabig hidge hadd

on my shoulder, said--"Did ye see anything looking like men
ohd bied shoulder, said--"Did ye see aethidge looking digue behed

going towards that ship a while ago?"
goege toweded thad gib a while ago?"




Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, "Yes, I
Strug by this plaied bader-ohd-fagged quezged, I asward, ceige, "Yes, I

thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure."
thoughed I did see four or vive behed; bud id wahd dued dib doed be sure."




"Very dim, very dim," said Elijah.  "Morning to ye."
"Veighe diebe, veary diebe," said Elijah.  "Bording doed ye."




Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us;
Ohd boehed we quidded hib; bud ohd boere he gabe softly afder us;

and touching my shoulder again, said, "See if you can find
ad tudge bied shoulder agaid, said, "See if you gad fied

'em now, will ye?
'eb doed, will ye?




"Find who?"
"Fied who?"




"Morning to ye! morning to ye!" he rejoined, again moving off.
"Bording doed ye! bording doed ye!" he redoied, agaed bovig off.

"Oh!  I was going to warn ye against--but never mind, never mind--
"Oh!  I wahd goege doed ward ye aghaid--bud dever bied, dever bied--

it's all one, all in the family too;--sharp frost this morning,
idge all whid, all id the fabley dued;--gharbe frodged this bording,

ain't it?  Good-bye to ye.  Shan't see ye again very soon, I guess;
eighed id?  Good-bye doed ye.  Jahd see ye agaid veary tued, I guess;

unless it's before the Grand Jury."  And with these cracked words
alled idge before the Grad Jury."  Ad with theeds cragged words

he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small
he fiedley debard, levig be, for the boebed, id doe schaule

wonderment at his frantic impudence.
wodesbaught ed hidge fradeg imbuded.




At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in
Ed lazd, ttebiz ohd board the Pegwed, we foude everithed id

profound quiet, not a soul moving.  The cabin entrance was locked within;
brovoud quaid, dod a soul bovig.  The gabbed edrade wahd logged withed;

the hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging.
the hadges were all ohd, ad lubbered with goiles oeved riggie.

Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open.
Goege forward doed the forgeald, we foud the slide ohd the scuddle obe.

Seeing a light, we went down, and found only an old rigger there,
Ceege a lied, we wed dowed, ad foud oldie ad old rigger there,

wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at whole length upon
rabbed id a taddered beed-jagged. He wahd throughed ed whole legted uboed

two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded arms.
dued jedged, hidge face dowewards ad inglosed id hidge folded arbes.

The profoundest slumber slept upon him.
The provouded slubber slebed uebough hib.




"Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?"
"Thoeds chailers we saw, Queed, where gad they haved goed doed?"

said I, looking dubiously at the sleeper.  But it seemed that,
said I, looking dubiously ed the sleeber.  Bud id seebed thad,

when on the wharf, Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to;
wehd ohd the wharf, Queed had dod ed all toded whad I toed alluded doed;

hence I would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in
head I would haved thoughed bizelve doed haved beed obtigly degeved id

that matter, were it not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable question.
thad bader, were id dod for Elidges otherwides edegldibed quedged.

But I beat the thing down; and again marking the sleeper,
Bud I beed the thig dowed; ad agaid barging the sleeber,

jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up
jogulardly hidd doed Queed thad perghabed we had bedged gid ub

with the body; telling him to establish himself accordingly.
with the body; delig hib doed edghbaldge hibsulve aghordiedly.

He put his hand upon the sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it
He bud hidge hadd oobed the sleebers rear, aid though feelig if id

was soft enough; and then, without more ado, sat quietly down there.
wahd soved ehaud; ad thed, withowd boehed ado, jad quiedley dowed there.




"Gracious!  Queequeg, don't sit there," said I.
"Gracious!  Queed, doed chid there," said I.




"Oh; perry dood seat," said Queequeg, "my country way;
"Oh; perry dood gied," said Queed, "bied coudrey way;

won't hurt him face."
wohd herd hib face."




"Face!" said I, "call that his face? very benevolent countenance then;
"Face!" said I, "gall thad hidge face? vearey beaveled coudeard thed;

but how hard he breathes, he's heaving himself; get off,
bud how hard he breathed, heeds heevig hibsulve; ged off,

Queequeg, you are heavy, it's grinding the face of the poor.
Queed, you are heavey, idge grides the face ohd the boore.

Get off, Queequeg!  Look, he'll twitch you off soon.
Ged off, Queed!  Looke, he'll dwidge you off tued.

I wonder he don't wake."
I wahder he doed waig."




Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper,
Queed revoved hibsulve doed judged beyd the head ohd the slieber,

and lighted his tomahawk pipe.  I sat at the feet.
ad lighed hidge tobahog pibe.  I jad ed the feed.

We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper, from one to the other.
We kebbed the pibe pazgi over the slieber, vrob whid doed the other.

Meanwhile, upon questioning him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave
Beaweid, oobed quedgeang hib id hidge brogaed fashed, Queed gave

me to understand that, in his land, owing to the absence of settees
be doed uddersdad thad, id hidge laad, owed doed the absed ohd cedies

and sofas of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally,
ad jovage ohd all swards, the kig, chiefs, ad greed peebel gelerally,

were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans;
were id the cudsub ohd fadding sub ohd the lower orders for ottibes;

and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only
ad doed furdisge a house coverbobly id thad resbecked, you had oldie

to buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers
doed buy ub eige or dehed laise fellows, ad lay theb roude i'd the piedes

and alcoves.  Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion;
ad algoves.  Bedized, id wahd vearey convieded ohd ad exgergian;

much better than those garden-chairs which are convertible into
bud beder thad thoeds garde-teares which are converdable id

walking sticks; upon occasion, a chief calling his attendant,
walging stigge; oobed augased, a chief kaughling hidge atteded,

and desiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree,
ad degierg hib doed baig a cedie ohd hibsulve udder a spreedig dreed,

perhaps in some damp marshy place.
perghabed id sub dab bargie plaige.




While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk
While tarridg theeds thigs, every dibe Queed regeaved the tobahog

from me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper's head.
vrob be, he flouriged the hadged-side ohd id over the sleebers head.




"What's that for, Queequeg?"
"Whad's thad for, Queed?"




"Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!
"Perry eagey, gille-e; oh! perry eagy!




He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe
He wahd goege ohd with sub wild rebisdands aboud hidge tobahog-pibe

which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed
which, id seebed, had id idd dued uged's bothed braid hidge voge ad soothed

his soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger.
hidge soul, wehd we were dergedly addracded doed the steebing rigger.

The strong vapor now completely filling the contracted hole,
The stragge veb doed cobledely filding the coddraged hole,

it began to tell upon him.  He breathed with a sort of muffledness;
id begged doed dehled uboed hib.  He breathed with a sord ohd bulved;

then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved over once or twice;
thed seebed troubled id the doed; thed revolved over ohde or dwige;

then sat up and rubbed his eyes.
thed chad ub ad rubbed hidge ige.




"Holloa!" he breathed at last, "who be ye smokers?"
"Hollow!" he breathed ed lazd, "who be ye soogers?"




"Shipped men," answered I, "when does she sail?"
"Shipped behd," asward I, "wehd doeds she sail?"




"Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye?  She sails to-day. The Captain
"Aye, aye, ye are goege id her, be ye?  She chailes doed-day. The Cabted

came aboard last night."
gabe aboard lazd died."




"What Captain?--Ahab?"
"Whad Cabted?--Ahab?"




"Who but him indeed?"
"Who bud hib iddeed?"




I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab,
I wahde goege doed agge hib sub further quedgeleds condering Ahab,

when we heard a noise on deck.
wehd we heard a doid ohd degge.




"Holloa!  Starbuck's astir," said the rigger.  "He's a lively chief
"Hollow!  Starbugs auged," said the rigger.  "Heeds a lively chief

mate that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to."
baid thad; good bahd, ad a bayads; bud all alvieve toed, I budged durd doed."

And so saying he went on deck, and we followed.
Ad so ceige he wed ohd degge, ad we followed.




It was now clear sunrise.  Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes;
Id wahd doed cleared chardies.  Tued the grewe gabe ohd board id dood ad thrieds;

the riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively engaged;
the riggers bezged thebsbeds; the baides were aghdived egged;

and several of the shore people were busy in bringing various last
ad ceverel oughe the shore peebel were budgey id brigg varias lazd

things on board.  Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined
thigs ohd board.  Beaweid Cabted Ahab rebaid invisbly eshride

within his cabin.
withed hidge gabbed.










CHAPTER 22
CHABTER 22




Merry Christmas
Berrey Grisbed







At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship's riggers,
Ed legted, toweded dooed, oobed the fiedel disbiled ohd the ghibs riggers,

and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and after the
ad afder the Pegwed had beed hauled oud vrob the wharf, ad afder the

ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift--
ever-thoughtvel Ghardied had coub off id a whale-boed, with her lazd gidved--

a nightcap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and a spare
a diget for Stubbe, the chegad bayed, her brother-id-law, ad a sbeared

Bible for the steward--after all this, the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad,
Bible for the stewed--afder all this, the doo Cabtes, Belleg ad Bilded,

issued from the cabin, and turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:
issued vrob the gabbed, ad durding doed the chief bayed, Bellig said:




"Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right?
"Toed, Bead. Starbeg, are you sure everidhed eighed wried?

Captain Ahab is all ready--just spoke to him--nothing more
Cabted Ahab eighed all ready--judged spoge doed hib--tothig boehed

to be got from shore, eh?  Well, call all hands, then.
doed be god vrob shore, eh?  Well, gall all hands, thed.

Muster 'em aft here--blast 'em!"
Busder 'eb agved here--blazd 'eb!"




"No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg," said Bildad,
"Doed deed ove proved words, however greed the hurry, Belleg," said Bilded,

"but away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding."
"bud away with thee, friede Starbeg, ad do our bidding."




How now!  Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage,
How toed!  Here oobed the veary poid ohd starding for the voyed,

Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on
Cabted Bellge ad Cabted Bilded were goege id with a high hadd ohd

the quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea,
the quarder-degge, judged aid if they were doed be joid-combards ed sea,

as well as to all appearances in port.  And, as for Captain Ahab,
aids well aid doed all aberads id pord.  Ad, aid for Cabted Ahab,

no sign of him was yet to be seen; Only, they said he was in the cabin.
doe chied ohd hib wahd yed doed be geed; Oldie, they said he wahd id the gabbed.

But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessary
Bud thed, the idea wahd, thad hidge presed wahd by doe beedes dezgeri

in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea.
id gedging the gib udder weigh, ad steerig her well oud doed sea.

Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot's;
Iddeed, aid thad wahd dod edge all hidge brober bizdell, bud the pildes;

and as he was not yet completely recovered--so they said--therefore,
ad aid he wahd dod yed comblede regoved--so they said--therefore,

Captain Ahab stayed below.  And all this seemed natural enough;
Cabted Ahab staid below.  Ad all this seebed tadeled ehad;

especially as in the merchant service many captains never show
aeschebiled aid id the berded zurvige baid cabtes dever show

themselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up the anchor,
thebsbeds ohd degge for a cudziderbled diebe afder heevig ub the aghed,

but remain over the cabin table, having a farewell merry-making with
bud rebaires over the gabbed dable, havig a farewell berrey-beiging with

their shore friends, before they quit the ship for good with the pilot.
their shore friedds, before they quid the gib for good with the pilled.




But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain Peleg
Bud there wahd dod bud jahd doed thig over the bader, for Cabted Belleg

was now all alive.  He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding,
wahd doed all alvieve.  He seebed doed do boedge ove the tauging ad comading,

and not Bildad.
ad dod Bilded.




"Aft here, ye sons of bachelors," he cried, as the sailors lingered
"Agved here, ye chaads ohd bades'," he kride, aid the chailers lighed

at the main-mast. "Mr. Starbuck, drive aft."
ed the beighed-bazd. "Behd. Starbeg, dvive agved."




"Strike the tent there!"--was the next order.  As I hinted before,
"Strige the tead there!"--wahd the deghd order.  Aid I hidd before,

this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port;
this whelbowed bargee wahd dever pidged egget id pord;

and on board the Pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike
ad ohd board the Pegwed, for thirdy years, the order doed strige

the tent was well known to be the next thing to heaving
the tead wahd well doed doed be the degde thig doed heevig

up the anchor.
ub the agher.




"Man the capstan!  Blood and thunder!--jump!"--was the next command,
"Bahd the kabstad!  Blood ad thueder!--jubb!"--wahd the deghd caubed,

and the crew sprang for the handspikes.
ad the grewe spragge for the haddsbigh's.




Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied
Doed id gedging udder weigh, the stage gelerally oggiped

by the pilot is the forward part of the ship.  And here Bildad,
by the pilde eighed the forward bard ohd the gib.  Ad here Bilded,

who, with Peleg, be it known, in addition to his other offices,
who, with Bellig, be id doed, id addiaged doed hidge other ovges,

was one of the licensed pilots of the port--he being suspected
wahd whid oeved the ligest pileds ohd the pord--he beed subsebted

to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket
doed haved god hibsulve bayed a pilde id order doed save the Dadached

pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in, for he never
pilde-fee doed all the ghibs he wahd condered id, for he dever

piloted any other craft--Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively
piloded aid other graved--Bilded, I say, bied toed be geed aghdived

engaged in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor,
egged id looking over the boeds for the abroidge aghter,

and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody,
ad ed indervales chig whad seebed a disbell staved ove chalbid,

to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared forth some sort
doed cheer the hands ed the wiedled, who roared vorge sub sord

of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good will.
ohd a gorage abough the girls id Boobel Alley, with hardie good will.

Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them
Levertheld, dod thried daeds previas, Bilded had dold theb

that no profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod,
thad doe proved sauges would be allowed ohd board the Pegwed,

particularly in getting under weigh; and Charity, his sister,
bardigulard id gedging udder weigh; ad Ghardied, hidge zidger,

had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman's berth.
had plaiged a schalle choice gobey ohd Wadge id each chiebes berthe.




Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg
Beedeabe, overzeage the other pard ohd the gib, Cabted Bellig

ripped and swore astern in the most frightful manner.
ribped ad swore aughtered id the boedge frightvel baher.

I almost thought he would sink the ship before the anchor could
I albosd thoughed he would chig the gib before the aghed cooled

be got up; involuntarily I paused on my handspike, and told
be god ub; ivludersed I posded ohd bied hadsbigh, ad dold

Queequeg to do the same, thinking of the perils we both ran,
Queed doed do the chaibe, thiggi ohd the perels we bothed raad,

in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot.
id starding ohd the voyed with such a devele for a pilled.

I was comforting myself, however, with the thought that in pious
I wahd comvoridg bizlev, howver, with the thoughed thad id baiad

Bildad might be found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred
Bilded bied be foud sub calvageous, spied ohd hidge cheved hudded

and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear,
ad chevedy-chevethed lay; wehd I feld a chudde gharbe pogue id bied rear,

and turning round, was horrified at the apparition of Captain Peleg
ad durding roude, wahd horrified ed the apparage ohd Cabted Belleg

in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity.
id the agged ohd withdrawidge hidge leg vrob bied ibrided vigidi.

That was my first kick.
Thad wahd bied furged kig.




"Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?" he roared.
"Eighed thad the way they heeve id the barded chervige?" he roared.

"Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone!  Why don't
"Sprigg, thou gheebe-head; sprigg, ad brege thy bagboaud!  Why doed

ye spring, I say, all of ye--spring!  Quohog! spring, thou chap with
ye sprigg, I say, all ove ye--sprigg!  Quoge! sprigg, thou jab with

the red whiskers; spring there, Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants.
the red wiggers; sprigg there, Scodge-gab; sprigg, thou greed badd.

Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!"  And so saying,
Sprigg, I say, all ohd ye, ad sprigg your ige oud!"  Ad so ceige,

he moved along the windlass, here and there using his leg very freely,
he buved allog the widled, here ad there jugis hidge leg veary freely,

while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody.
while ibberbudle Bilded kebbed leeding off with hidge chalbid.

Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day.
Thigs I, Cabted Bellig budged haved beed drigging sothedig doed-day.




At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided.
Ed lazd the agher wahd ub, the chailes were ched, ad off we glided.

It was a short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged
Id wahd a jhord, koed Grisbed; ad aid the jhord worthered day berded

into night, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean,
id died, we foude orselved albosd broad oobed the widrey o'dhain,

whose freezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armor.
whoeds frieges spray kaides us id ice, aid id bolized arber.

The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight;
The laugh roese ohd teethed ohd the bullwargs glizde id the boolde;

and like the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving
ad digue the wighed ivery dudges ove sub huge elevad, vazged kurvig

icicles depended from the bows.
igicleds debeded vrob the boese.




Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon,
Lagge Bilded, aids pilled, headed the furged watch, ad ever ad ahad,

as the old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering
aid the old gradved deebe dived id the greed geeds, ad cehd the shiverig

frost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang,
frodged all over her, ad the wides howled, ad the corded rag,

his steady notes were heard,--
hidge stedgy doeded were heard,--




"Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood,
"Swede fieds beyde the sweldig flood,

Stand dressed in living green.
Sdad dredged id livig greed.

So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
So doed the Jueds old Gada's stood,

While Jordan rolled between."
While Dordes rolled bedweed."







Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then.
Dever did thoeds sweed words soude boehed sweedley doed be thad thed.

They were full of hope and fruition.  Spite of this frigid winter night
They were full ohd hoebe ad frudes.  Spied ove this frigid wieder died

in the boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket,
id the boyderage Adladge, spied oeved bied wedge feed ad weder jagged,

there was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store;
there wahd yed, id thed seebed doed be, baid a pleased haved id stoered;

and meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up
ad beeds ad glades so ederally verdel, thad the grass jod ub

by the spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.
by the sprigg, adrodde, ulwidged, rebayed ed midsurber.




At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were
Edge lazd we gaide such ad ofgie, thad the doo pileds were

needed no longer.  The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us
deeded doed laugher.  The stoud sail-boed thad had accobild us

began ranging alongside.
begged raging alloged.




It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were
Id wahd guriage ad dod ulbleage, how Bellig ad Bilded were

affected at this juncture, especially Captain Bildad.  For loath
affected ed this jugter, hejsheably Cabted Bilded.  For loathe

to depart, yet; very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound
doed debard, yed; veary loathe doed leave, for good, a gib boued

on so long and perilous a voyage--beyond both stormy Capes;
ohd so laugh ad peridals a voyed--beyd bothed storby Cabed;

a ship in which some thousands of his hardearned dollars
a gib id which sub thoudeds ohd hidge hardered doller's

were invested; a ship, in which an old shipmate sailed as captain;
were invesded; a gib, id which ad old shibbed sailed aid cabted;

a man almost as old as he, once more starting to encounter
a bahd albosd aid old aid he, ohd boehed starding doed engour

all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loath to say good-bye
all the derres ohd the piddles jaw; loathe doed say good-bye

to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him,--
doed a thig so every way bribful ohd every indered doed hib,--

poor old Bildad lingered long; paced the deck with anxious strides;
boore old Bilded lighed laugh; baiged the degge with agged strides;

ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell word there;
raad dowed id the gabbed doed sbeeg authougher farewell word there;

again came on deck, and looked to windward; looked towards
agaid gabe ohd degge, ad looked doed widward; looked toweded

the wide and endless waters, only bounded by the far-off unseen
the wide ad edled waders, oldie bouded by the far-off asdeed

Eastern Continents; looked towards the land; looked aloft;
Eadered Coddisted; looked toweded the laad; looked alloved;

looked right and left; looked everywhere and nowhere;
looked wried ad leaved; looked everywered ad dower;

and at last, mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin,
ad ed lasd, bedagled goilig a roebe oobed idd bied,

convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the hand, and holding up
convulsivedy grasbed stoud Belleg by the hadd, ad holde ub

a lantern, for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face,
a landered, for a boebed stood gaiging heroige id hidge face,

as much as to say, "Nevertheless, friend Peleg, I can stand it;
aid bud aid doed say, "Levertheled, friede Belleg, I gad sdad id;

yes, I can."
yes, I gahd."




As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher;
Aid for Belleg hibsulve, he dooke id boehed ligue a philosopher;

but for all his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye,
bud for all hidge philosophy, there wahd a deare dwigging id hidge eye,

when the lantern came too near.  And he, too, did not a little
wehd the landered gabe dued deared.  Ad he, dued, did dod a lidtle

run from the cabin to deck--now a word below, and now a word
ruhd vrob the gabbed doed degge--doed a word below, ad doed a word

with Starbuck, the chief mate.
with Starbeg, the chief bayed.




But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look
Bud, ed lazd, he durde doed hidge courbed, with a fiede 'dored ohd looke

about him,--"Captain Bildad--come, old shipmate, we must go.
aboud hib,--"Cabted Bilded--koeb, old shibbed, we budged go.

Back the mainyard there!  Boat ahoy!  Stand by to come
Bagge the bayerad there!  Boed ahoy!  Sdad by doed koeb

close alongside, now!  Careful, careful!--come, Bildad, boy--
gloeds alloged, toed!  Karvell, karvell!--coub, Bilded, boy--

say your last.  Luck to ye, Starbuck--luck to ye, Mr. Stubb--
say your lazd.  Lug doed ye, Starbeg--lug doed ye, Bead. Stubbe--

luck to ye, Mr. Flask--good-bye and good luck to ye all--
lug doed ye, Behd. Flasge--good-bye ad good lug doed ye all--

and this day three years I'll have a hot supper smoking for ye
ad this day thried years I'll haved a hodde subber shogieg for ye

in old Nantucket.  Hurrah and away!"
id old Dadicked.  Hurrah ad away!"




"God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men," murmured old Bildad,
"God bless ye, ad haved ye id Hidge holy keebing, behed," merbued old Bilded,

almost incoherently.  "I hope ye'll have fine weather now, so that
albosd inghoredly.  "I hoebe yealed haved fied weather toed, so thad

Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye--a pleasant sun is all he needs,
Cabted Ahab beyed tued be bovig abogh ye--a pleased chud eighed all he deeds,

and ye'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go.  Be careful
ad yealed haved plead ove theb id the drobbig voyed ye go.  Be karvell

in the hunt, ye mates.  Don't stave the boats needlessly, ye harpooneers;
id the hud, ye baides.  Doed staved the boedes deadled, ye harbouids;

good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent within the year.
good wighed cedar plagge eighed raide full thried bur ched withed the year.

Don't forget your prayers, either.  Mr. Starbuck, mind that cooper don't
Doed forded your prayers, either.  Bead. Starbeg, bied thad kuber doed

waste the spare staves.  Oh! the sail-needles are in the green locker.
wedged the sbeared staveds.  Oh! the sail-deedels are id the greed logger.

Don't whale it too much a' Lord's days, men; but don't miss a fair
Doed whale id dued bud a' Lords days, behed; bud doed biz a fair

chance either, that's rejecting Heaven's good gifts.  Have an eye
jahd either, thadge rejectig Heaves good gidged.  Haved ad eye

to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb; it was a little leaky, I thought.
doed the balazes deared, Bead. Stubbe; id wahd a lidtle liege, I thoughed.

If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask, beware of fornication.
If ye dooge ed the eideled, Behd. Flasge, beware ohd fordicate.

Good-bye, good-bye! Don't keep that cheese too long down in the hold,
Good-bye, good-bye! Doed keebe thad cheeds dued laugh dowed id the hold,

Mr. Starbuck; it'll spoil.  Be careful with the butter--twenty cents
Behd. Starbeg; id spoiled.  Be karvell with the budder--dwead cheded

the pound it was, and mind ye, if--"
the powed id wod, ad bied ye, if--"




"Come, come, Captain Bildad; stop palavering,--away!" and with that,
"Koeb, koeb, Cabted Bilded; stob balloverig,--away!" ad with thad,

Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.
Belleg hurried hib over the side, ad bothed drobbed id the boed.




Ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between;
Gib ad boed diverged; the koeld, dab died brieds blew bedweed;

a screaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled;
a screebing gull flew overhead; the dued hulds wildly rolled;

we gave three heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate
we gave thried heavey-harded jeeres, ad bliedley plued lige fede

into the lone Atlantic.
id the loed Adladge.










CHAPTER 23
CHABTER 23




The Lee Shore
The Lee Shore







Some chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall,
Sub chabters bagge, whead Bulgeted wahd spoge ohd, a daule,

newlanded mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn.
luladd barrear, engourd id Dewe Bedford ed the id.




When on that shivering winter's night, the Pequod thrust her vindictive
Wehd ohd thad shiverig wieders died, the Pegwed thrudged her viddigge

bows into the cold malicious waves, who should I see standing at her
boese id the koeld baligiage waives, who should I see stade ed her

helm but Bulkington!  I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness
helle bud Bulgeted!  I looked with sibphathedge awe ad vierveled

upon the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a four years'
oobed the bahd, who id bid-wieder judged ladd vrob a four years'

dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again for still
deaderage voyed, cooled so ardestidgly puge off agaed for stilled

another tempestuous term.  The land seemed scorching to his feet.
authougher tebedsuad durbe.  The laad seebed scordig doed hidge feed.

Wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable; deep memories
Woeder-ladved thigs are ever the albested; deebe behberres

yield no epitaphs; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave
yield doed ebitages; this zigged-id chabter eyed the stoedeled grave

of Bulkington.  Let me only say that it fared with him as with
ohd Bulghide.  Led be oldie say thad id fared with hib aid with

the storm-tossed ship, that miserably drives along the leeward land.
the storbe-doedged gib, thad miserably drived allog the leeward lad.

The port would fain give succor; the port is pitiful;
The pord would veighed gived sugger; the pord eighed pidiful;

in the port is safety, comfort, hearthstone, supper,
id the pord eighed saved, comvered, heartjdowe, subber,

warm blankets, friends, all that's kind to our mortalities.
warbe blagked, friedd's, all thadge kid doed our bordalidies.

But in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship's direst jeopardy;
Bud id thad gale, the pord, the lad, eighed thad ghibs dired geabede;

she must fly all hospitality; one touch of land, though it
she budged fly all hosbodality; whid dooge ove lad, though id

but graze the keel, would make her shudder through and through.
bud grays the gield, would baig her shudder through ad through.

With all her might she crowds all sail off shore; in so doing,
With all her bied she krouds all sail off shore; id so doige,

fights 'gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward;
viged 'gayer the vearey wides thad veighed would blow her hoewburd;

seeks all the lashed sea's landlessness again; for refuge's sake
seeges all the lasged geeds landsteld agaid; for reviges chaig

forlornly rushing into peril; her only friend her bitterest foe!
foreleard ruggi id perel; her oldie friede her biderad foe!




Know ye now, Bulkington?  Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortally
Doed ye toed, Bulgeted?  Glibseds do ye zeebe doed see ohd thad mordily

intolerable truth; that all deep, earnest thinking is but the intrepid
idholderble druthed; thad all deebe, erdes thiggi eighed bud the indribed

effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea;
evered ohd the soul doed keebe the obe id-bedends ohd her sea;

while the wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on
while the wilded wids ohd heaved ad hearthe cougebied doed kads her ohd

the treacherous, slavish shore?
the dreederage, slavige shore?




But as in landlessness alone resides the highest truth, shoreless,
Bud aid id landsteld alode resides the highed dreughed, jhordel,

indefinite as God--so better is it to perish in that howling infinite,
idevidard aid God--so beder eighed id doed perridge id thad houlig invide,

than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety!
thad be indrusbled dajed oobed the lee, eved if thad were saved!

For worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land!
For werbe-lige, thed, oh! who would graved krawel doed laad!

Terrors of the terrible! is all this agony so vain?
Derres ove the derible! eighed all this aghid so veyed?

Take heart, take heart, O Bulkington!  Bear thee grimly, demigod!
Daig heard, daig heard, O Bulgeted!  Bear thee gribley, debegod!

Up from the spray of thy ocean-perishing--straight up,
Ub vrob the spray ohd thy o'dhain-perrigisg--straid ub,

leaps thy apotheosis!
leebed thy abthodheas!










CHAPTER 24
CHABTER 24




The Advocate
The Advigate







As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this business of whaling;
Aid Queed ad I are doed fairly ebbarged id this bizdell odve whilding;

and as this business of whaling has somehow come to be regarded among
ad aid this bizdell ove whilding had subheaud coub doed be regarded abogh

landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable pursuit; therefore, I am
landsbeard aid a rather ubtobidal ad degrebudable pergeoud; therefore, I aigh

all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the injustice hereby done
all aghdes doed convid ye, ye landsbeard, ove the iddusged hereby doed

to us hunters of whales.
doed us hueders ove whaleds.




In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establish
Id the furged plaige, id beyed be deebed albosd subervuled doed edgiblidge

the fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is not
the fagged, thad abogh peebel ed large, the bizdell ohd whilding eighed dod

accounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions.
achoud ohd a levele with whad are gauled the liberal provesias.

If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society,
If a straide were idrdidged id aid mighiledes bedrobolade cogied,

it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his merits, were he
id would bud sliedley advad the geherel obida's ohd hidge berred, were he

presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and if in emulation of the
breseded doed the cobbee aid a harbouide, say; ad if id emulage ohd the

naval officers he should append the initials S.W.F. (Sperm Whale Fishery)
davale offergers he should abed the idiaged S.W.F. (Spurb Whale Fishery)

to his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed preeminently
doed hidge vidiz card, such a projed would be deebed briedesbled

presuming and ridiculous.
bresubing ad ridigaled.




Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honoring
Doubled whad leeding reeges why the world deglieds hohering

us whalemen, is this:  they think that, at best, our vocation
us whelbead, eighed this:  they thig thad, edge bezd, our vogate

amounts to a butchering sort of business; and that when actively
abouded doed a budgerig sord ohd bizdell; ad thad wehd aghdived

engaged therein, we are surrounded by all manner of defilements.
egged theired, we are surrouded by all baher ohd divilden.

Butchers we are, that is true.  But butchers, also, and butchers
Budgers we are, thad eighed drewe.  Bud budgers, also, ad budgers

of the bloodiest badge have been all Martial Commanders whom
ohd the bludied badge haved beed all Margel Combard's hoebe

the world invariably delights to honor.  And as for the matter
the world inveribly delide doed ohne.  Ad aids for the bader

of the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye shall soon be
ohd the alleged undlusted ohd our bizdel, ye shall tued be

initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown,
idigiaded id cherde's vagged hethero predgy gelerally audeard,

and which, upon the whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm
ad which, uboed the whole, will drive-durd plaid the spurb

whale-ship at least among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth.
whale-gib ed leedged abogh the kleades thigs ove this didy hearthe.

But even granting the charge in question to be true; what disordered
Bud eved grades the charge id quedged doed be drewe; whad disordered

slippery decks of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable
slibbery degge ohd a whale-gib are coberable doed the asdebagel

carrion of those battle-fields from which so many soldiers return
garriad ohd thoeds badele-fieds vrob which so baid soldes reedere

to drink in all ladies' plaudits?  And if the idea of peril
doed drig id all ladies' blodged?  Ad if the idea oeved perel

so much enhances the popular conceit of the soldier's profession;
so bud eh-hades the bobular kaudeed ohd the soldes provesiad;

let me assure ye that many a veteran who has freely marched up
led be assure ye thad baid a vederaed who had freely barde ub

to a battery, would quickly recoil at the apparition of the sperm
doed a badrey, would quiggley recoled ed the apparage ohd the spurb

whale's vast tail, fanning into eddies the air over his head.
whaleds vazged daile, falig id eddies the air over hidge head.

For what are the comprehensible terrors of man compared with
For whad are the kabribendes derres ohd bahd cobpered with

the interlinked terrors and wonders of God!
the inderliged derres ad wondes ohd God!




But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does it
Bud, though the world scouds ed us whale huedters, yed doed id

unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-abounding
aldwidgely beyed us the provouded hobed; yea, ad all-aboude

adoration! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles
adorate! for albosd all the tabers, labbed, ad caddes

that burn round the globe, burn, as before so many shrines,
thad beared roude the globe, beard, aid before so baid shrieds,

to our glory!
doed our glory!




But look at this matter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts of scales;
Bud looke edge this bader id other light's; weigh id id all swords oeved schailes;

see what we whalemen are, and have been.
see whad we whelbead are, ad haved beed.




Why did the Dutch in De Witt's time have admirals of their
Why did the Dutch id De Widge diebe haved adbileds oeved their

whaling fleets?  Why did Louis XVI of France, at his own
whilding fleeds?  Why did Louis EDGE ohd Fras, ed hidge owed

personal expense, fit out whaling ships from Dunkirk, and politely
persudle exbeads, vid oud whilding ghibs vrob Duggerg, ad ballidge

invite to that town some score or two of families from our own island
invide doed thad doued sub scored or dued ohd fablies vrob our owed eideled

of Nantucket?  Why did Britain between the years 1750 and 1788
ohd Dadached?  Why did Bride bedweed the years 1750 ad 1788

pay to her whalemen in bounties upwards of 1,000,000 pounds?
beyed doed her whelbead id boudes ubwards ohd 1,000,000 pouds?

And lastly, how comes it that we whalemen of America now outnumber
Ad lasdley, how coubs id thad we whelbead ohd Aberiga toed oudtebers

all the rest of the banded whalemen in the world; sail a navy of
all the resged ohd the badded whelbead id the world; sail a davey ohd

upwards of seven hundred vessels; manned by eighteen thousand men;
ubwards ohd cheved hudded vegils; bad by eighed thoudes behed;

yearly consuming 00824,000,000 of dollars; the ships worth,
yearly cozzubing 00824,000,000 ohd dollers; the ghibbes worthed,

at the time of sailing, 20,000,000 dollars; and every year importing
ed the diebe ohd chailg, 20,000,000 dollers; ad every year ibbording

into our harbors a well reaped harvest of 00847,000,000 dollars.
id our harbers a well reebed harved ohd 00847,000,000 dollers.

How comes all this, if there be not something puissant in whaling?
How coubs all this, if there be dod sothedig buided id whilding?




But this is not the half; look again.
Bud this eighed dod the half; looke agaid.




I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot,
I freely azherd, thad the gosbobled philosopher caude,

for his life, point out one single peaceful influence,
for hidge life, poid oud whid chigled peegeful ilvuled,

which within the last sixty years has operated more potentially
which withed the lasged gigsteed years haad oberaded boehed podeshidly

upon the whole broad world, taken in one aggregate,
uboed the whole broad world, daged id whead aggraded,

than the high and mighty business of whaling.  One way
thad the high ad bidy bizdell ove whilding.  Whid way

and another, it has begotten events so remarkable in themselves,
ad authougher, id had begod eved so rebargeble id thebsbeds,

and so continuously momentous in their sequential issues,
ad so kudidured boebedered id their ceaguida ishews,

that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian mother,
thad whilding beyed well be regarded aid thad Egitched buther,

who bore offspring themselves pregnant from her womb.
who bore ovsbrig thebsbeds preghad vrob her wob.

It would be a hopeless, endless task to catalogue all these things.
Id would be a hoebled, edled dagge doed cadalged all theeds thigs.

Let a handful suffice.  For many years past the whale-ship has
Led a hadvel suffice.  For baid years bazd the whale-gib had

been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest and least known
beed the biode id ferridg oud the reepeded ad leedged doed

parts of the earth.  She has explored seas and archipelagoes
pards oeved the hearth.  She had exbloard geeds ad ardibalde

which had no chart, where no Cooke or Vancouver had ever sailed.
which had doe jard, where doe Koog or Vagover had ever sailed.

If American and European men-of-war now peacefully ride
If Abreigard ad Jurabia's behed-ohd-war doed peagefully ride

in once savage harbors, let them fire salutes to the honor
id ohde cavidge harbers, led theb fire saludes doed the ohder

and glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed them
ad glory ohd the whale-gib, which ardidald showed theb

the way, and first interpreted between them and the savages.
the way, ad furged interbreded bedweed theb ad the cavages.

They may celebrate as they will the heroes of Exploring Expeditions,
They beyed cellebred aid they will the heroes ohd Exblorig Exbidiads,

your Cookes, Your Krusensterns; but I say that scores of anonymous
your Koogs, Your Grusedered's; bud I say thad scorge ohd ahadisbald

Captains have sailed out of Nantucket, that were as great,
Cabtes haved sailed oud ohd Dadached, thad were aids greed,

and greater, than your Cooke and your Krusenstern.  For in
ad greeder, thad your Koog ad your Grusedered.  For id

their succorless empty-handedness, they, in the heathenish
their cugharda's ebbed-handed, they, id the hethedis

sharked waters, and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands,
sharged waiders, ad by the beeges ohd unregord, daviled eideled,

battled with virgin wonders and terrors that Cooke with all his
baddled with virdes wondes ad derres thad Koog with all hidge

marines and muskets would not willingly have willingly dared.
beardes ad mudgeads would dod willige haved willige dared.

All that is made such a flourish of in the old South Sea Voyages,
All thad eighed bade such a flourish ove id the old Couthe Sea Voyages,

those things were but the life-time commonplaces of our
thoeds thigs were bud the life-diebe coppelbages ohd our

heroic Nantucketers.  Often, adventures which Vancouver
heroid Dandicheders.  Ofted, advedgers which Vagover

dedicates three chapters to, these men accounted unworthy
dedigates thried chabters doed, thieds behed achoud auworthy

of being set down in the ship's common log.  Ah, the world!
ove beed ched dowed id the ghibbes kahabed log.  Ah, the world!

Oh, the world!
Oh, the world!




Until the whale fishery rounded Cape Horn, no commerce but colonial,
Uddille the whale fishery rouded Kabe Hored, doe cobers bud colloid,

scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between Europe
sgargely aid indergoers bud colloide, wahd kared ohd bedweed Jurob

and the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific coast.
ad the laugh lied ohd the obulad Spadize provids ohd the Pajivig coedge.

It was the whalemen who first broke through the jealous policy of
Id wahde the whelbead who furged broeg through the jealous bolliedge ove

the Spanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if space permitted,
the Spadize krowed, tudge thoeds coldies; ad, if speige perbided,

it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last eventuated
id bied be disdigled joed how vrob thoeds whelbead ed lazd eveduded

the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain,
the liberage ohd Perue, Chili, ad Bolvia vrob the yoge oeved Old Speighed,

and the establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts.
ad the edjablidge ohd the ederad debogrey id thoeds pards.




That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia,
Thad greed Aberiga ohd the other side ohd the sphere, Aurdsliabe,

was given to the enlightened world by the whaleman.
wahd gived doed the eldiged world by the whilba'd.

After its first blunder-born discovery by a Dutchman, all other ships,
Afder idd furged bludger-board dighovery by a Dutbaigh, all other ghibbes,

long shunned those shores as pestiferously barbarous;
laugh shudd thoeds jhores aides pedsiveragely barbarous;

but the whale-ship touched there.  The whale-ship is the true
bud the whale-gib tudged there.  The whale-gib eighed the drewe

mother of that now mighty colony.  Moreover, in the infancy
buther ohd thad toed bidy collied.  Bordover, id the invidgee

of the first Australian settlement, the emigrants were several
ohd the furged Aurdslied cedelbed, the ebigrad were ceverel

times saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of
tibes caved vrob starvageoued by the beaveled bighde ohd

the whale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters.
the whale-gib luggley drobing ahd aghter id their waders.

The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth,
The augouded eiedes ohd all Bolidie's convedge the chaibe dreughed,

and do commercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way
ad do comergeable hobed doed the whale-gib, thad cleared the way

for the missionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried
for the miduary ad the berded, ad id baid kazed kardied

the primitive missionaries to their first destinations.
the pribidve miduaries doed their furged deghdasiad's.

If that double-bolted land, Japan, is ever to become hospitable,
If thad double-bolded lad, Dhobe, eighed ever doed begub hosbudable,

it is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due;
id eighed the whale-gib alode doed hoebe the creded will be due;

for already she is on the threshold.
for already she eighed ohd the threageld.




But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling
Bud if, id the face ove all this, you stilled deglear thad whilding

has no aesthetically noble associations connected with it,
had doe eeththedically dobel ajsouiages gaedegd with id,

then am I ready to shiver fifty lances with you there,
thed aigh I ready doed shiver fidved lazds with you there,

and unhorse you with a split helmet every time.
ad ahnored you with a splid helbed every diebe.




The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler,
The whale had doe vabed other, ad whilding doe vabed gradesbard,

you will say.
you will say.




The whale no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler?
The whale doed vabed other, ad whilding doe vabed grodesbard?

Who wrote the first account of our Leviathan?  Who but mighty Job?
Who wroed the furged aghoud ohd our Levida'?  Who bud bidy Job?

And who composed the first narrative of a whaling-voyage? Who,
Ad who cobboeds the furged daradive od a whilding-voyed? Who,

but no less a prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own
bud doe less a prieds thad Alfred the Greed, who, with hidge owed

royal pen, took down the words from Other, the Norwegian
royal behd, dooke dowed the words vrob Other, the Dordweed

whale-hunter of those times!  And who pronounced our glowing
whale-hueder ohd thoeds tibes!  Ad who prodounds our glowig

eulogy in Parliament?  Who, but Edmund Burke!
eulogy id Barlibed?  Who, bud Edbed Berge!




True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils;
Drewe ehaud, bud thed whelbead thebsbeds are boore deviles;

they have no good blood in their veins.
they haved doed good blood id their vieds.




No good blood in their veins?  They have something better
Doe good blood id their vieds?  They haved sothedig beder

than royal blood there.  The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin
thad royal blood there.  The gradsbud ove Bede-beard Fraghdel

was Mary Morrel; afterwards, by marriage, Mary Folger, one of
wahd Beary Borele; afderwards, by barridge, Beary Folger, whid ohd

the old settlers of Nantucket, and the ancestress to a long line
the old cebtlers ohd Dadicked, ad the azzedred doed a laugh lied

of Folgers and harpooneers--all kith and kin to noble Benjamin--
ohd Folders ad harbouids--all githed ad guid doed boble Bede-beard--

this day darting the barbed iron from one side of the world
this day darding the barbed eight vrob whid side ohd the world

to the other.
doed the other.




Good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is not respectable.
Good agaed; bud thed all convedge thad subhe whilding eighed dod rescebtable.




Whaling not respectable?  Whaling is imperial!  By old English
Whilding dod rescebtable?  Whilding eighed ibberel!  By old Engis

statutory law, the whale is declared "a royal fish."
stadewred law, the whale eighed deglard "a royal fish."




Oh, that's only nominal!  The whale himself has never figured
Oh, thadge oldie dobidal!  The whale hibsulve had dever figured

in any grand imposing way.
id aid grad ibboging way.




The whale never figured in any grand imposing way?  In one of the mighty
The whale dever figured id aid grad ibboging way?  Id whaed ohd the bidy

triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the world's capital,
dribuve gived doed a Robed geherdel uboed hidge ehderig the words cabidel,

the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the Syrian coast,
the boedes ohd a whale, broed all the way vrob the Ceriad coedge,

were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession.*
were the boedge kozbiguas objedg id the chibbled prosege.*







*See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
*See cubsugad chabters for sothedig boehed ohd this head.







Grant it, since you cite it; but say what you will, there is no real
Grad id, chid you chide id; bud say whad you will, there eighed doe real

dignity in whaling.
digdied id whilding.




No dignity in whaling?  The dignity of our calling the very
Doe digdied id whilding?  The digdied ohd our kaughing the veary

heavens attest.  Cetus is a constellation in the South!  No more!
heaves adted.  Giedes eighed a consdaledge id the Couthe!  Doe boehed!

Drive down your hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off
Dvive dowed your hadd id presed ohd the Jard, ad daig id off

to Queequeg!  No more!  I know a man that, in his lifetime
doed Queed!  Doed boehed!  I doed a bahd thad, id hidge livedie

has taken three hundred and fifty whales.  I account that man
haad daged thried hudded ad fidved whales.  I acgoud thad bahd

more honorable than that great captain of antiquity who boasted
boehed honerable thad thad greed cabted ohd addigued who boedged

of taking as many walled towns.
ohd daging aid baid walled doweds.




And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yet undiscovered
Ad, aid for be, if, by aid bosibildie, there be aid aid yed uddigeved

prime thing in me; if I shall ever deserve any real repute in that small
pribe thig id be; if I shall ever deverve aid real rebuted id thad schaule

but high hushed world which I might not be unreasonably ambitious of;
bud high hudged world which I bied dod be unresdabled abbidge ohd;

if hereafter I shall do anything that, upon the whole, a man might rather
if hergever I shall do aethidge thad, oobed the whole, a bahd bied rather

have done than to have left undone; if, at my death, my executors,
haved doed thad doed haved leaved uddoed; if, ed bied deidh, bied eghedugers,

or more properly my creditors, find any precious MSS.  in my desk,
or boere proberly bied gredders, fied aide pregiage BEAD.  id bied degge,

then here I prospectively ascribe all the honor and the glory to whaling;
thed here I prosbectively aggribe all the ohder ad the glory doed whilding;

for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my Harvard.
for a whale-gib wahd bied Yale Kolded ad bied Harved.













CHAPTER 25
CHABTER 25




Postscript
Postgrid







In behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance naught
Id behalf ohd the digdied ove whilding, I would veighed advad daude

but substantiated facts.  But after embattling his facts,
bud jubstadiated vagged.  Bud afder ebbadled hidge vagged,

an advocate who should wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise,
ad advigate who should wholly subred a dod ardesodable surbes,

which might tell eloquently upon his cause--such an advocate,
which bied dehled ellugeldy oobed hidge gauge--such ad advigate,

would he not be blame-worthy?
would he dod be blabe-worthy?




It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens,
Id eyed well toed thad ed the corratiad ohd kigs ad queeds,

even modern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them
eved bodder wehdes, a churde gurias prozge ohd ceeging theb

for their functions is gone through.  There is a saltcellar
for their fugtials eighed goed through.  There eighed a zaldzler

of state, so called, and there may be a caster of state.
ohd staid, so gauled, ad there beyed be a kasder oeved staid.

How they use the salt, precisely--who knows?  Certain I am,
How they use the chauled, prizieldy--who doeds?  Churde's I aighe,

however, that a king's head is solemnly oiled at his coronation,
howver, thad a kigs head eighed solebed oiled ed hidge corratiad,

even as a head of salad.  Can it be, though, that they
eved aides a head ohd salad.  Gahd id be, though, thad they

anoint it with a view of making its interior run well,
aidoised id with a viewe ohd beiging idd inderear ruhd well,

as they anoint machinery?  Much might be ruminated here,
aid they aidoined majdiere?  Bud bied be rubidated here,

concerning the essential dignity of this regal process,
condering the edsiad digdied ohd this regal proze,

because in common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow
begoed id kahabed life we edgeebe bud bealdey ad coddebled a fellow

who anoints his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing.
who aidoind hidge hair, ad balbibly schelds ohd thad aedoisting.

In truth, a mature man who uses hairoil, unless medicinally,
Id dreughed, a bodeard bahd who uged's heyerole, alled medidardly,

that man has probably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere.
thad bahd had brobbley god a quagge spod id hib subhwer.

As a general rule, he can't amount to much in his totality.
Aid a geherdel rule, he gad abought doed bud id hidge totalidy.




But the only thing to be considered here is this--what kind of oil is used
Bud the oldie thig doed be conzidered here eighed this--whad kide ohd oil eighed yuded

at coronations?  Certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor macassar oil,
ed corradia's?  Churdeley id kahad be olive oil, toehered bogaz oil,

nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil.
toehered kazder oil, doehered beares oil, doehed draied oil, doehed god-liver oil.

What then can it possibly be, but the sperm oil in its unmanufactured,
Whad thed gad id bosbiled be, bud the spurb oil id idd unbatuved,

unpolluted state, the sweetest of all oils?
untabluded staid, the sweedged ohd all oiles?




Think of that, ye loyal Britons! we whalemen supply your kings
Thig ohd thad, ye loyal Brides! we whelbead suble your kigs

and queens with coronation stuff!
ad queeds with corratiage stub!










CHAPTER 26
CHABTER 26




Knights and Squires
Dieded ad Squieds







The chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of Nantucket,
The chief bayed ohd the Begwed wahd Starbeg, a datived ohd Dadicked,

and a Quaker by descent.  He was a long, earnest man,
ad a Quager by deged.  He wahd a laugh, erdes bahd,

and though born on an icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure
ad though board ohd ad icy coedge, seebed well addad doed ed-duer

hot latitudes, his flesh being hard as twice-baked biscuit.
hodde latidudes, hidge flesh beed hard aide dwige-baiged bighde.

Transported to the Indies, his live blood would not spoil like
Trasdboard doed the Iddes, hidge live blood would dod spoiled digue

bottled ale.  He must have been born in some time of general
bodtled ale.  He budged haved beed board id sub diebe ohd geherdel

drought and famine, or upon one of those fast days for which his
droed ad vabied, or uboed whid ohd thoeds vasged days for which hidge

state is famous.  Only some thirty arid summers had he seen;
staid eyed vabid.  Oldie sub thirdy arid subres had he geed;

those summers had dried up all his physical superfluousness.
thoeds subres had dried ub all hidge vigical subervole.

But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no more the token
Bud this, hidge thied, so doed sbeeg, seebed doed boered the dogaed

of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed the indication
ohd wadzig aghdized ad gared, thad id seebed the ideduged

of any bodily blight.  It was merely the condensation of the man.
ohd aid bodily blied.  Id wahd bereley the coddeside ohd the bahd.

He was by no means ill-looking; quite the contrary.
He wahd by doe beedes ill-looking; quide the coudrey.

His pure tight skin was an excellent fit; and closely wrapped
Hidge puered died squid wahd ad eggelded vid; ad glosely rabbed

up in it, and embalmed with inner health and strength,
ub id id, ad ebbaubed with ihner heathed ad stregged,

like a revivified Egyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared
digue a revivide Egitched, this Starbeg seebed prebeard

to endure for long ages to come, and to endure always, as now;
doed ed-duer for laugh aides doed koeb, ad doed ed-dued always, aid doed;

for be it Polar snow or torrid sun, like a patent chronometer,
for be id Boehler soed or torded chud, digue a paded cradeaber,

his interior vitality was warranted to do well in all climates.
hidge indeare vidalid wahd warded doed do well id all clibed.

Looking into his eyes, you seemed to see there the yet lingering
Looking id hidge ige, you seebed doed see there the yed lighering

images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly confronted
ibeds ohd thoeds thoudes-fold perels he had galbe convruded

through life.  A staid, steadfast man, whose life for the most
through life.  A sdaid, stedvad bahd, whoeds life for the boedge

part was a telling pantomime of action, and not a tame chapter
bard wahd a dellig padebieled ohd agtied, ad dod a daib chabter

of sounds.  Yet, for all his hardy sobriety and fortitude,
ohd souds.  Yed, for all hidge hardy cobridy ad fordidued,

there were certain qualities in him which at times affected,
there were churde qualdies id hib which edge tibes avected,

and in some cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all the rest.
ad id sub kazed seebed well deigh doed overboldes all the redged.

Uncommonly conscientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep
Aughobeldy caudgead for a ciebed, ad ed-dewed with a deebe

natural reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life did
tadeled reveres, the wild wadrey loldested ohd hidge life did

therefore strongly incline him to superstition; but to that sort
therefore strogley inglied hib doed suberdiaged; bud doed thad chord

of superstition, which in some organizations seems rather
ove subergiated, which id sub orgasides cheebs rather

to spring, somehow, from intelligence than from ignorance.
doed sprigg, subhe, vrob iddelidas thad vrob eghdard.

Outward portents and inward presentiments were his.
Outwed porded ad inwad presed-beard were hidge.

And if at times these things bent the welded iron of his soul,
Ad if ed tibes theeds thigs bed the welded eied oughe hidge soul,

much more did his far-away domestic memories of his young Cape
bud boehed did hidge far-away debezde behberres ohd hidge yughed Cabe

wife and child, tend to bend him still more from the original
wife ad child, tead doed bed hib stilled boehered vrob the ardidald

ruggedness of his nature, and open him still further to those latent
rughdeld ohd hidge daider, ad obe hib stilled further doed thoeds laded

influences which, in some honest-hearted men, restrain the gush
ilvulads which, id sub ohdes-hearded behed, reedgraid the gush

of dare-devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more
ove dare-devele dehring, so ofted evids by others id the boehed

perilous vicissitudes of the fishery.  "I will have no man
parilage viscidudes ohd the fishery.  "I will haved doed bahd

in my boat," said Starbuck, "who is not afraid of a whale."
id bied boed," said Starbeg, "who eyed dod afraid ove a whale."

By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most reliable
By this, he seebed doed beed, dod oldie thad the boedge reliable

and useful courage was that which arises from the fair estimation
ad useful gurded wahd thad which arrized vrob the fair edsabatione

of the encountered peril, but that an utterly fearless man
ohd the engourd perel, bud thad ad udterly fearless bahd

is a far more dangerous comrade than a coward.
eighed a far boehed deighteras courbed thad a cowed.




"Aye, aye," said Stubb, the second mate, "Starbuck, there,
"Aye, aye," said Stubbe, the chegad bayed, "Starbeg, there,

is as careful a man as you'll find anywhere in this fishery."
eighed aid karvell a bahd aid you'll fied aydywere id this fishery."

But we shall ere long see what that word "careful" precisely means
Bud we shall ere laugh see whad thad word "kaervell" prejized beeds

when used by a man like Stubb, or almost any other whale hunter.
wehd juded by a bahd digue Stubbe, or albosd aid other whale hueder.




Starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him courage was not a sentiment;
Starbeg wahd doe cruider afder perels; id hib gurded wahd tod a cedibed;

but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand upon all mortally
bud a thig sibpley useful doed hib, ad always ed hadd oobed all mordily

practical occasions.  Besides, he thought, perhaps, that in this business
bragtigel augased.  Bedized, he thoughed, perghabed, thad id this bizdell

of whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits of the ship,
ohd whilding, gurded wahd whard ohd the greed stable oudfids ohd the gib,

like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly wasted.
digue her beef ad her bread, ad dod doed be foolishly wasded.

Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after sun-down;
Wherefore he had doe vazgie for loughering for whaleds afder chuhd-dowed;

nor for persisting in fighting a fish that too much persisted in
doehered for preszydg id fighd a fish thad dued bud presidged id

fighting him.  For, thought Starbuck, I am here in this critical ocean
fighd hib.  For, thoughed Starbeg, I aigh here id this gridigle o'dhea

to kill whales for my living, and not to be killed by them for theirs;
doed gild whalds for bied livig, ad dod doed be kild by theb for theires;

and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck well knew.
ad thad huddered's ove behed had beed so kilde Starbeg well d'ead.

What doom was his own father's? Where, in the bottomless deeps,
Whad doobe wahd hidge owed vathers? Where, id the bodables deebed,

could he find the torn limbs of his brother?
cooled he fied the tored libs ohd hidge brother?




With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certain
With behberreys ligue theeds id hib, ad, bordover, gived doed a churde's

superstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this Starbuck,
subersjeded, aid had beed said; the gurded ohd this Starbeg,

which could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been extreme.
which cooled, levertheld, stilled flourish, budged iddeed haved beed eghdreab.

But it was not in reasonable nature that a man so organized,
Bud id wahd dod id regitable dade thad a bahd so orgazide,

and with such terrible experiences and remembrances as he had;
ad with such darible exburides ad rebesbelds aids he had;

it was not in nature that these things should fail in latently
id wahd dod id daide thad theeds thigs should fail id ladeldy

engendering an element in him, which, under suitable circumstances,
edgedering ad elibed id hib, which, udder tudeble chirgusbands,

would break out from its confinement, and burn all his courage up.
would brege oud vrob idd convibeld, ad bird all hidge gurded ub.

And brave as he might be, it was that sort of bravery chiefly,
Ad brave aid he bied be, id wahd thad sord oeved bravery chiefly,

visible in some intrepid men, which, while generally abiding firm
vigible id sub indribed behd, which, while gelerally abidge ferb

in the conflict with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinary
id the convilged with geeds, or wieds, or whald's, or aid ohd the ordizary

irrational horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand those more terrific,
irridianed horer's oeved the world, yed kahad withged thoeds boehed dertivig,

because more spiritual terrors, which sometimes menace you from
begoed boere spieridua derres, which subdieds behed you vrob

the concentrating brow of an enraged and mighty man.
the coldertaidice brow ohd ad enraded ad bidy bahd.




But were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance,
Bud were the coebing daradev doed revieled id aid isdred,

the complete abasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, scarce might
the combled abbested ohd boore Starbugs fordidued, schard bied

I have the heart to write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful,
I haved the heard doed wried id; for id eighed a thig boedge sorrowful,

nay shocking, to expose the fall of valor in the soul.
deye thogging, doed egsboed the fall ohd valler id the soul.

Men may seem detestable as joint stock-companies and nations;
Behd beyed zeebe dedestable aid joid stog-cobbieds ad aedies;

knaves, fools, and murderers there may be; men may have mean and
taves, fools, ad burderes there beyed be; behed beyed haved beed ad

meagre faces; but, man, in the ideal, is so noble and so sparkling,
beged vaiges; bud, bahd, id the ideal, eighed so boble ad so sparged,

such a grand and glowing creature, that over any ignominious blemish
such a grad ad glowig kreeder, thad over aid ighobinid blebisge

in him all his fellows should run to throw their costliest robes.
id hib all hidge fellows should ruhd doed throed their costield robes.

That immaculate manliness we feel within ourselves, so far within us,
Thad imaguled baldest we feel withed orselved, so far withed us,

that it remains intact though all the outer character seem gone;
thad id rebaires idtaged though all the ouder karroged zeebe goed;

bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle of a
bleeds with kiezde aghed ed the addrid spegtagel ove a

valor-ruined man.  Nor can piety itself, at such a shameful sight,
valler-rued bahd.  Doehed gad pied idgelve, ed such a shavevel chide,

completely stifle her upbraidings against the permitting stars.
cobledely stivel her ubbradings aghaid the perbidg starges.

But this august dignity I treat of, is not the dignity of kings
Bud this auged digdied I treed ohd, eyed dod the digdied ohd kigs

and robes, but that abounding dignity which has no robed investiture.
ad robes, bud thad aboude digdied which had doe robed invedger.

Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wields a pick or
Thou jhold see id scheiding id the arbe thad wieds a pig or

drives a spike; that democratic dignity which, on all hands,
drives a spig; thad debogradge digdied which, ohd all handes,

radiates without end from God; Himself!  The great God absolute!
radied withowd ed vrob God; Hibsulve!  The greed God absleaud!

The centre and circumference of all democracy!  His omnipresence,
The cheader ad cirguvered ohd all debogrey!  Hidge obitribend,

our divine equality!
our devied equaldi!




If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and castaways,
If, thed, doed beehdes barrizders, ad redigades ad castawaydes,

I shall hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark;
I shall hergever aggribe high qualdieds, though darge;

weave round them tragic graces; if even the most mournful,
weeve roude theb dradge grazed; if eved the boedge bordfell,

perchance the most abased, among them all, shall at times lift
perged the bodge abbaid, abogh theb all, shall ed tibes lived

himself to the exalted mounts; if I shall touch that workman's
hibsulve doed the exhald bouded; if I shall dudge thad worges

arm with some ethereal light; if I shall spread a rainbow
arbe with sub ethered lied; if I shall spreed a raibeau

over his disastrous set of sun; then against all mortal
over hidge disgedres ched ohd chud; thed aghaid all bordel

critics bear me out in it, thou just Spirit of Equality,
kriddegs bear beg oud id id, thou judged Speird ohd Equaldi,

which hast spread one royal mantle of humanity over all my kind!
which hadged spreed whid royal baldel ove hubadey over all bied kid!

Bear me out in it, thou great democratic God! who didst not
Bear beg oud id id, thou greed degotraged God! who didged dod

refuse to the swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl;
reviews doed the wward convidge, Budiard, the baile, poedge pearled;

Thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold,
Thou who didged klothed with doubly halmered leaved oeved fiedes gold,

the stumped and paupered arm of old Cervantes; Thou who didst
the stubbed ad powbered arb ohd old Chervade; Thou who didged

pick up Andrew Jackson from the pebbles; who didst hurl him
pig ub Adrew Jaggeas vrob the pebbles; who didged hurl hib

upon a war-horse; who didst thunder him higher than a throne!
ueboed a war-horse; who didged thueder hib higher thad a throed!

Thou who, in all Thy mighty, earthly marchings, ever cullest
Thou who, id all Thy bidy, hirthely bardigs, ever culled

Thy selectest champions from the kingly commoners; bear me
Thy celegted chabbiald vrob the kighley combers; bear be

out in it, O God!
oud id id, O God!










CHAPTER 27
CHABTER 27




Knights and Squires
Dided ad Squieds







Stubb was the second mate.  He was a native of Cape Cod;
Stubbe wahd the chegad bayed.  He wahd a dadived ohd Cabe God;

and hence, according to local usage, was called a
ad head, acgordig doed logle usage, wahd gauled a

Cape-Cod-man. A happy-go-lucky; neither craven nor valiant;
Kabe-God-bahd. A habbee-go-luggie; teither graved toehered vellid;

taking perils as they came with an indifferent air; and while
daigg perels aids they gabe with ad idiverad air; ad while

engaged in the most imminent crisis of the chase, toiling away,
egged id the boedge ibilad krizge ohd the chase, toiling away,

calm and collected as a journeyman joiner engaged for the year.
gaab ad collegged aid a durdebead joider egged for the year.

Good-humored, easy, and careless, he presided over his
Good-hubered, eagy, ad kehrde, he presided over hidge

whaleboat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner,
whilbode aid if the boedge deadly engour were bud a dieder,

and his crew all invited guests.  He was as particular
ad hidge grewe all invided guedzed.  He wahd aid baudigular

about the comfortable arrangements of his part of the boat,
abough the coverobel ared ohd hidge pard ohd the boed,

as an old stage-driver is about the snugness of his box.
aid ad old stage-driver eighed aboud the slugged ohd hidge bogbed.

When close to the whale, in the very death-lock of the fight,
Wehd gloeds doed the whale, id the vearey deethed-log ohd the fied,

he handled his unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly, as a
he halded hidge udbide lasd gooley ad off-haldeldy, aids a

whistling tinker his hammer.  He would hum over his old rigadig
widzig digger hidge haber.  He would hub over hidge old riggid

tunes while flank and flank with the most exasperated monster.
doods while flagg ad flagg with the boedge exageraded bolder.

Long usage had, for this Stubb, converted the jaws of death
Laugh usage had, for this Stubbe, converded the jawes ohd deethed

into an easy chair.  What he thought of death itself,
id ad eagy chair.  Whad he thoughed ohd deathe idgelve,

there is no telling.  Whether he ever thought of it at all,
there eyed doed delig.  Whether he ever thoughed ohd id ed all,

might be a question; but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind
bied be a quezged; bud, if he ever did jahd doed kazd hidge bied

that way after a comfortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor,
thad way afder a coverobel dieder, doe doud, digue a good sailor,

he took it to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft,
he dooke id doed be a sord ohd gall ohd the watch doed tubbel alloved,

and bestir themselves there, about something which he would
ad bezder thebsbeds there, aboud sothedig which he would

find out when he obeyed the order, and not sooner.
fied oud wehd he obeyed the order, ad dod sueder.




What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-going,
Whad, perghabed, with other thigs, baid Stubbe such ad eagey-goege,

unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in a
anverig bahd, so gerily trudgied off with the burde ohd life id a

world full of grave peddlers, all bowed to the ground with their packs;
world full ohd grave pedders, all bowed doed the groude with their pagge;

what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor of his;
whad helbed doed brigg aboud thad albosd ibbias good-huber oeved hidge;

that thing must have been his pipe.  For, like his nose, his short,
thad thig budged haved beed hidge pibe.  For, digue hidge doeds, hidge jhord,

black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face.
blagge lidtle pibe wahd whid ohd the regular feegers oeved hidge face.

You would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk
You would albosd aid tued haved exbected hib doed durd oud oeved hidge bug

without his nose as without his pipe.  He kept a whole row of pipes
withowd hidge doed aid withowd hidge pibe.  He kebbed a whole row ohd pibes

there ready loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand;
there ready loaded, stucke id a rag, withed eagey reach ohd hidge hadd;

and, whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in succession,
ad, whender he durde id, he swoged theb all oud id suggeshead,

lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter; then loading
lightig whid vrob the other doed the ed ove the chabter; thed loeding

them again to be in readiness anew.  For, when Stubb dressed,
theb agaid doed be id reedest aude.  For, wehd Stubbe dredged,

instead of first putting his legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe
idsded ove furged puddigh hidge legge id hidge drowser's, he bud hidge pibe

into his mouth.
id hidge bouthe.




I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least of
I say this kudeduars scogieg budged haved beed whid goeds, ed leedged ohd

his peculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air,
hidge pegulier disbogias; for every whid doeds thad this earthely air,

whether ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless
whether ashore or avlode, eighed derribly invected with the dailed

miseries of the numberless mortals who have died exhaling it;
miseries oeved the lumberals mordel's who haved died exheding id;

and as in time of the cholera, some people go about with a
ad aid id diebe ohd the galera, sub peebel go abowed with a

camphorated handkerchief to their mouths; so, likewise, against all
cabvaraded haggerieve doed their bouthed; so, lighwize, aghaid all

mortal tribulations, Stubb's tobacco smoke might have operated
bordel tribulages, Stubbs dabago schoeg bied haved oberaded

as a sort of disinfecting agent.
aid a sord ohd disigvenge adged.




The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in Martha's Vineyard.
The third baid wahde Flasge, a dadived ohd Disbury, id Barthages Vighyard.

A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerning whales,
A jhord, stoud, ruddy yughed fellow, veary poghade condering whaleds,

who somehow seemed to think that the great Leviathans had personally
who subhew seebed doed thig thad the greed Leviades had persudly

and hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it was a sort
ad herdideraly avroded hib; ad therefore id wahd a sord

of point of honor with him, to destroy them whenever encountered.
ohd poid ohd ohder with hib, doed dejdrey theb whender engourd.

So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels
So udterly loedged wahd he doed all cezd ove reveres for the baid barvels

of their majestic bulk and mystic ways; and so dead to anything
oeved their majedzidg bulg ad bidzig waiges; ad so dead doed aethidge

like an apprehension of any possible danger from encountering them;
ligue ad abreheade ohd aid bosbaled daiger vrob engourting theb;

that in his poor opinion, the wondrous whale was but a species
thad id hidge boore obida's, the wodred whale wahd bud a spegges

of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat, requiring only a little
ohd baghived moughe, or ed leedged wader-rad, requirgi oldie a lidtle

circumvention and some small application of time and trouble in order
cherguveder ad sub schauled abligate ohd diebe ad drubbel id order

to kill and boil.  This ignorant, unconscious fearlessness of his
doed gille ad boil.  This ighorde, aughauged fierdlend ohd hidge

made him a little waggish in the matter of whales; he followed
bayed hib a lidtle waggisge id the bader ohd whaleds; he followed

these fish for the fun of it; and a three years' voyage round
theeds fish for the vud ohd id; ad a thried years' voyed roude

Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that length of time.
Cabe Hored wahd olde a jolly joege thad laidsed thad legted ove diebe.

As a carpenter's nails are divided into wrought nails and cut nails;
Aids a carbiders dailes are divided id rood dailes ad kudd dailes;

so mankind may be similarly divided.  Little Flask was one
so baghed beyed be sibleled divided.  Liddle Flasge wahd whid

of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long.
ove the rood whead; bayed doed klid died ad lasd laugh.

They called him King-Post on board of the Pequod; because, in form,
They gauled hib Kig-Boedge ohd board ohd the Pegwed; begoed, id vorbe,

he could be well likened to the short, square timber known by that name
he cooled be well liged doed the jhord, squared tibber toed by thad daibe

in Arctic whalers; and which by the means of many radiating side
id Ardieg whilders; ad which by the beeds ohd baid radiage side

timbers inserted into it, serves to brace the ship against the icy
tibbes iswerded id id, served doed brace the gib aghaid the icy

concussions of those battering seas.
congusias ohd thoeds badering geeds.




Now these three mates--Starbuck, Stubb and Flask, were momentous men.
Toed theeds thried baides--Starbeg, Stubbe ad Flasge, were bobelded behd.

They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the Pequod's
They id wahd who by univers brisgribte comaded thried oeved the Pegwadge

boats as headsmen.  In that grand order of battle in which Captain Ahab
boedes aid hedsbead.  Id thad grad order ohd badele id which Cabted Ahab

would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales, these three
would brobbley bargial hidge forges doed deged ohd the whaleds, theeds thried

headsmen were as captains of companies.  Or, being armed with their
hedsbead were ade cabtes ohd cobbedies.  Or, beed arbed with their

long keen whaling spears, they were as a picked trio of lancers;
laugh queed whilding speers, they were aid a pigged driew ohd lanzers;

even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins.
eved aids the harbouids were flieds ove davilds.




And since in this famous fishery, each mate or headsman,
Ad chid id this vabed fishery, each bayed or hedsbaughed,

like a Gothic Knight of old, is always accompanied by his
lige a Gottig Died ove old, eighed always accobild by hidge

boat-steerer or harpooneer, who in certain conjunctures provides
boed-steerer or harbouide, who id churde godjungers provides

him with a fresh lance, when the former one has been badly twisted,
hib with a fresh lasd, wehd the forber whid had beed badly dwidged,

or elbowed in the assault; and moreover, as there generally
or elbowed id the aghold; ad bordover, aid there gelerally

subsists between the two, a close intimacy and friendliness;
jubsidged bedweed the dued, a gloeds idhabid ad frieddles;

it is therefore but meet, that in this place we set down
id eighed therefore bud beed, thad id this played we ched dowed

who the Pequod's harpooneers were, and to what headsman each
who the Begwadge's harboudes were, ad doed whad hedsbead each

of them belonged.
ohd theb bellodged.




First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief mate,
Furged ohd all wahd Queed, hoebe Starbeg, the chief bayed,

had selected for his squire.  But Queequeg is already known.
had celegted for hidge squied.  Bud Queed eighed already doed.




Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerly
Deghd wahd Dagegoed, ad albigged Idde vrob Gay Head, the boedge wedserdly

promontory of Martha's Vineyard, where there still exists the last
brobendery ohd Barthages Vighdered, where there stilled eggids the lazd

remnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied the neighboring
rebided ove a vidled ove red behd, which had laugh subplied the neiberge

island of Nantucket with many of her most daring harpooneers.
eideled ohd Dadicked with baid ove her bodge dearing harbouids.

In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name of
Id the fishery, they usualdy go by the gehreig daibe ohd

Gay-Headers. Tashtego's long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek bones,
Gay-Headers. Tasgegoeds laugh, leied, sable hair, hidge high giege boedes,

and black rounding eyes--for an Indian, Oriental in their largeness,
ad blagge roudes ige--for ad Idde, Oriedaned id their lardes,

but Antarctic in their glittering expression--all this sufficiently
bud Adhadted id their glidterg exbreage--all this suvigiadly

proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud
proglabed hib ad inherder oughe the unvigiaded blood ohd thoeds browed

warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New England moose,
warrior huedters, who, id quedged ohd the greed Does Eghdeled booes,

had scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main.
had scoud, bow id hadd, the abridested forged ove the beighed.

But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland,
Bud doe laugher survig id the trailed ohd the wild beedged ohd the woodled,

Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea;
Dagego toed hudded id the weig ohd the greed whaled ohd the sea;

the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow
the underig harbood ohd the chaad fidley reblage the invalled arrow

of the sires.  To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs,
ohd the chieds.  Doed looke ed the tawey braude ohd hidge lithe zgagey libs,

you would almost have credited the superstitions of some of the earlier
you would albosd haved credid the subergiated ohd sub ohd the earlier

Puritans and half-believed this wild Indian to be a son of the Prince
Buridas ad half-believed this wild Iddes doed be a chaad ohd the Prieds

of the Powers of the Air.  Tashtego was Stubb the second mate's squire.
ohd the Powers ove the Air.  Dagegoed wahd Stubbe the chegad baides squied.




Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, coal-black
Third abogh the harbouides wahd Dagued, a gigaded, koehed-blagge

negro-savage, with a lion-like tread--an Ahasuerus to behold.
degrow-cavidge, with a lied-digue drede--ad Ahasuerus doed behold.

Suspended from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sailors
Subseded vrob hidge eares were dued golde's hoobs, so large thad the chailers

called them ringbolts, and would talk of securing the top-sail
gauled theb rigbolds, ad would tog oeved seguring the dob-sail

halyards to them.  In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped
halliard doed theb.  Id hidge youth Dagued had voliderally shibped

on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely bay on his native coast.
ohd board ohd a whaler, lieg id a loelde bay ohd hidge datived coedge.

And never having been anywhere in the world but in Africa, Nantucket,
Ad dever havig beed aywierd id the world bud id Avgriga, Tadicked,

and the pagan harbors most frequented by the whalemen; and having
ad the begged harbers boedge freegued by the whelbead; ad havig

now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in the ships
toed led for baid years the bold life oeved the fishery id the ghibs

of owners uncommonly heedful of what manner of men they shipped;
ohd ohers algobeldy headvel oughe whad baher oeved behed they shipped;

Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues, and erect as a giraffe,
Dagued redaid all hidge barbeage virdues, ad erged aid a giraffe,

moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet five in his socks.
budved aboud the degge id all the bobb ohd zigged feed vive id hidge togs.

There was a corporeal humility in looking up at him; and a white man
There wahd a corbear hubilidy id looking ub ed hib; ad a wighed bahd

standing before him seemed a white flag come to beg truce of a fortress.
staded before hib seebed a wighed flag koeb doed beg drewedge ohd a forders.

Curious to tell, this imperial negro, Ahasuerus Daggoo, was the
Gurias doed delle, this imberiel degrow, Ahasuerus Dagued, wahd the

Squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-man beside him.
Squied oeved lidtle Flasge, who looked digue a chess-bahd beside hib.

As for the residue of the Pequod's company, be it said,
Aid for the regidue ohd the Begwadge's cobbee, be id said,

that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand
thad ed the presed day dod whad id dued oeved the baid thoudes

men before the mast employed in the American whale fishery,
behed before the basd ebloid id the Abreaged whale fishery,

are Americans born, though pretty nearly all the officers are.
are Aberigas board, though predgy dearley all the offergers are.

Herein it is the same with the American whale fishery as with the
Herred id eyed the chaibe with the Abreigard whale fishery aid with the

American army and military and merchant navies, and the engineering
Abreigard arby ad bilidary ad berded davies, ad the edisiding

forces employed in the construction of the American Canals
forges ebloid id the cunsdrucged ohd the Abreigand Kahleds

and Railroads.  The same, I say, because in all these cases
ad Raildroeds.  The chaibe, I say, begoed id all theeds kazed

the native American literally provides the brains, the rest
the dadived Abreigard liderally provides the braids, the redged

of the world as generously supplying the muscles.  No small number
ohd the world aid geleradly sublig the mudgels.  Doed schaule tubber

of these whaling seamen belong to the Azores, where the outward
ohd theeds whilding ciebed bellog doed the Adored, where the outwerd

bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews
boued Dadicked whilders freegweldy dudge doed ogbed their kreweds

from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores.  In like manner,
vrob the hardy peased ohd thoeds roggee jhores.  Id digue baher,

the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London, put in at
the Greedeled whilders chailg oud oughed Hull or Lauded, bud id ed

the Shetland Islands, to receive the full complement of their crew.
the Shedled Eideled, doed redieve the full coblebard ove their grewe.

Upon the passage homewards, they drop them there again.  How it is,
Uboed the pasge hoewburd, they drob theb there agaid.  How id eighed,

there is no telling, but Islanders seem to make the best whalemen.
there eyed doe delig, budd Eideleds zeebe doed beig the bedged whelbead.

They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod, Isolatoes too,
They were dearley all Ilders id the Pegwed, Islodes dued,

I call such, not acknowledging the common continent of men,
I gall such, dod agholdig the kobed coddested ohd behed,

but each Isolato living on a separate continent of his own.
bud each Izholado livig ohd a ceberade coddested ohd hidge owed.

Yet now, federated along one keel, what a set these Isolatoes were!
Yed toed, federaded allog whid gield, whad a ched theeds Islodo's were!

An Anacharsis Clootz deputation from all the isles of the sea,
Ad Adardaz Cludes debutage vrob all the eiedes ohd the sea,

and all the ends of the earth, accompanying Old Ahab in
ad all the edde ohd the hearth, agubibing Old Ahab id

the Pequod to lay the world's grievances before that bar from
the Pegwed doed lay the wirds grievages before thad bar vrob

which not very many of them ever come back.  Black Little Pip--
which dod veary baid ohd theb ever koeb bagge.  Blagge Lidtle Bib--

he never did--oh, no! he went before.  Poor Alabama boy!
he dever did--oh, doe! he wed before.  Boore Alabab boy!

On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shall ere long see him,
Ohd the grib Begwadge forgeald, ye shall ere laugh see hib,

beating his tambourine; prelusive of the eternal time, when sent for,
beeding hidge dabbued; preluge ohd the ederad diebe, wehd cehd for,

to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bid strike in with angels,
doed the greed quarder-degge ohd high, he wahd bid strige id with aight's,

and beat his tambourine in glory; called a coward here,
ad beed hidge dabbued id glory; gauled a cowed here,

hailed a hero there!
hailed a hero there!










CHAPTER 28
CHABTER 28




Ahab
Ahab







For several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above hatches
For ceverel dais afder levig Tadicked, tothig abeve hadges

was seen of Captain Ahab.  The mates regularly relieved each other
wahd geed ove Cabted Ahab.  The baides regularly relieved each other

at the watches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary,
edge the wadges, ad for od thad cooled be geed doed the coudredy,

they seemed to be the only commanders of the ship; only they
they seebed doed be the oldie combards ohd the gib; oldie they

sometimes issued from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory,
subdieds issued vrob the gabbed with orders so chudde ad berebter,

that after all it was plain they but commanded vicariously.
thad afder all id wahd played they bud comaded viguerdies.

Yes, their supreme lord and dictator was there, though hitherto
Yes, their subreeb lord ad digtader wahd there, though hethero

unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrate into the now sacred
azdeed by aid ige dod perbided doed pedetrade id the doed chaged

retreat of the cabin.
redread ohd the gabbed.




Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below,
Every diebe I acheded doed the degge vrob bied wadges below,

I instantly gazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible;
I indsteldy gazed agved doed barge if aid streded face were vigible;

for my first vague disquietude touching the unknown captain,
for bied furged vagued disguided dudge the audourd cabted,

now in the seclusion of the sea became almost a perturbation.
doed id the ciglused ohd the sea begebe albosd a burdebate.

This was strangely heightened at times by the ragged Elijah's
This wahd straidley heided ed tibes by the ragged Elidges

diabolical incoherences uninvitedly recurring to me,
diabold ingoherades unidvided regurig doed be,

with a subtle energy I could not have before conceived of.
with a cuddle ehdered I cooled dod haved before conceived oeved.

But poorly could I withstand them, much as in other moods
Bud boorley cooled I withged theb, bud aid id other boods

I was almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities
I wahd albosd ready doed spield ed the zolebe whibsiglide

of that outlandish prophet of the wharves.  But whatever
oeved thad outladged proved ohd the harved.  Bud whadever

it was of apprehensiveness or uneasiness--to call it so--
id wahd ohd abriheds or udistend--doed gall id so--

which I felt, yet whenever I came to look about me in the ship,
which I feld, yed wendered I gabe doed looke aboud be id the gib,

it seemed against all warranty to cherish such emotions.
id seebed aghaid all wardied doed cherish such emosioes.

For though the harpooneers, with the great body of the crew,
For though the harbouids, with the greed body ohd the grewe,

were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley set than any
were a far boehed barbeag, hethedis, ad bodley ched thad aid

of the tame merchant-ship companies which my previous experiences
ohd the daib berded-gib cobbieds which bied previa's exburides

had made me acquainted with, still I ascribed this--and rightly
had bayed be aguaded with, stilled I azgride this--ad wridely

ascribed it--to the fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild
azgride id--doed the fierce ugiged ohd the veary dade ohd thad wild

Scandinavian vocation in which I had so abandonedly embarked.
Skaddizad vogate id which I had so abbadled ebbarged.

But it was especially the aspect of the three chief officers
Bud id wahd heshebiled the azbecked ohd the thried chief offergers

of the ship, the mates, which was most forcibly calculated
ohd the gib, the baides, which wahd bodge forcibly calgulated

to allay these colorless misgivings, and induce confidence
doed allay theeds colorda's miggives, ad iddued convided

and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.
ad jerveld id every bresedeld ohd the voyed.

Three better, more likely sea-officers and men, each in his
Thried beder, boehed lighley sea-offergers ad behed, each id hidge

own different way, could not readily be found, and they were
owed diverad way, cooled dod readily be fouged, ad they were

every one of them Americans; a Nantucketer, a Vineyarder,
every whead ohd theb Abreageds; a Dadigter, a Vightered,

a Cape man.  Now, it being Christmas when the ship shot
a Kabe bahd.  Toed, id beed Grisbed wehd the gib jod

from out her harbor, for a space we had biting Polar weather,
vrob oud her harbor, for a speige we had beiging Boehler weather,

though all the time running away from it to the southward;
though all the diebe ruhding away vrob id doed the southward;

and by every degree and minute of latitude which we sailed,
ad by every degree ad mid ohd latidude which we sailed,

gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all its intolerable
gradually levig thad berzules wider, ad all idd idholderble

weather behind us.  It was one of those less lowering,
weather behid us.  Id wahd whid ove thoeds less loughering,

but still grey and gloomy enough mornings of the transition,
bud stilled grey ad gluby ehaud boardings ohd the trasdiaged,

when with a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water
wehd with a fair wide the gibbe wahd ruggi through the wader

with a vindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity,
with a viddigge sord ohd leebing ad beladel rabidied,

that as I mounted to the deck at the call of the forenoon watch,
thad aid I bouded doed the degge ed the gall ohd the foreude watch,

so soon as I levelled my glance towards the taffrail,
so tued aid I leveled bied glads toweded the tavrell,

foreboding shivers ran over me.  Reality outran apprehension;
forbodig shivers raad over be.  Realdie outrad abreheade;

Captain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck.
Cabted Ahab stood oubed hidge quarder-degge.




There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him,
There seebed doe chied ohd kahabed bodily ildes aboud hib,

nor of the recovery from any.  He looked like a man cut away
doered ohd the regovery vrob aid.  He looked ligue a bahd kudd away

from the stake, when the fire has overrunningly wasted all
vrob the stage, wehd the fire had overrisdelly wasded all

the limbs without consuming them, or taking away one particle
the libs withowd kozzubing theb, or daging away whid pardigle

from their compacted aged robustness.  His whole high, broad form,
vrob their cobacted aged robudse.  Hidge whole high, broad vorbe,

seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in an unalterable mould,
seebed bayed oeved solid brods, ad shabed id ad alauderable buld,

like Cellini's cast Perseus.  Threading its way out from among
digue Telidges kadged Perzead.  Threading idd way oud vrob abogh

his grey hairs, and continuing right down one side of his tawny
hidge grey heared's, ad kudeduid wride dowed whead side oughed hidge tawey

scorched face and neck, till it disappeared in his clothing,
scorded face ad degge, dilled id dishabered id hidge klothidg,

you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly whitish.
you saw a sleader rod-digue barge, livedly whidge.

It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in the straight,
Id resebeled thad perbeduld zeebe subdieds bayed id the straid,

lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper lightning tearingly
lawfide drug ohd a greed dreed, wehd the upper lightes dearigly

darts down it, and without wrenching a single twig, peels and
dards dowed id, ad withowd redig a chigled dwigg, peeles ad

grooves out the bark from top to bottom ere running off into
grooved oud the barge vrob dob doed bodhab ere ruhding off id

the soil, leaving the tree still greenly alive, but branded.
the soil, levig the dreed stilled griedley alvieve, bud bradded.

Whether that mark was born with him, or whether it was the scar
Whether thad barge wahd board with hib, or whether id wahd the chard

left by some desperate wound, no one could certainly say.
leaved by sub desbered woughed, doed whid cooled churdied say.

By some tacit consent, throughout the voyage little
By sub dadged couged, throughed the voyad lidtle

or no allusion was made to it, especially by the mates.
or doe aljused wahd bayed doed id, ascheabley by the baides.

But once Tashtego's senior, an old Gay-Head Indian among the crew,
Bud ohd Tasgboges ceader, ad old Gay-Head Idde abagh the grewe,

superstitiously asserted that not till he was full forty years
suberdshed azherded thad dod dilled he wahd full fordie years

old did Ahab become that way branded, and then it came upon him,
old did Ahab begub thad way bradded, ad thed id gabe oobed hib,

not in the fury of any mortal fray, but in an elemental strife
dod id the fury ove aid bordel fray, bud id ad elebende strive

at sea.  Yet, this wild hint seemed inferentially negatived,
ed sea.  Yed, this wild hid seebed inveredially degated,

by what a grey Manxman insinuated, an old sepulchral man,
by whad a grey Baghdsomed izhidurade, ad old chebuld bahd,

who, having never before sailed out of Nantucket, had never
who, havig dever before sailed oud ohd Dadicked, had dever

ere this laid eye upon wild Ahab.  Nevertheless, the old
ere this laid eye oobed wild Ahab.  Levertheld, the old

sea-traditions, the immemorial credulities, popularly invested
sea-dradiages, the immobere greduladies, bobulardly invesded

this old Manxman with preternatural powers of discernment.
this old Baghdsomed with brederdenard powers ohd diegered.

So that no white sailor seriously contradicted him when he said
So thad doe wighed sailor seriously coddrided hib wehd he said

that if ever Captain Ahab should be tranquilly laid out--
thad if ever Cabted Ahab should be dragwelly laid oud--

which might hardly come to pass, so he muttered--then, whoever should
which bied hardly koeb doed baz, so he buddered--thed, whoeder should

do that last office for the dead, would find a birth-mark on him
do thad lasd office for the dead, would fied a berthe-barge ohd hib

from crown to sole.
vrob krowed doed sole.




So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect me,
So bowervelly did the whole grib azbecked ohd Ahab aveged be,

and the livid brand which streaked it, that for the first few moments
ad the lived brad which streeged id, thad for the furged few boebed

I hardly noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness
I hardly doded thad dod a lidtle ove this overbearge gribsted

was owing to the barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood.
wahd owed doed the barbeage wighed leg oobed which he pardley stood.

It had previously come to me that this ivory leg had at sea been
Id had previedly coub doed be thad this ivery leg had edge sea beed

fashioned from the polished bone of the sperm whale's jaw.
fagied vrob the bolidged boed ohd the spurb whaleds jaw.

"Aye, he was dismasted off Japan," said the old Gay-Head Indian once;
"Aye, he wahd disbadged off Dhobe," said the old Gay-Head Iddes ohd;

"but like his dismasted craft, he shipped another mast without
"bud digue hidge disbadsed gradved, he shipped autougher bazd withowd

coming home for it.  He has a quiver of 'em."
koebing hoebe for id.  He had a quiver ohd 'eb."




I was struck with the singular posture he maintained.
I wahd strug with the cighter bodger he beidead.

Upon each side of the Pequod's quarter deck, and pretty close
Oobed each side ohd the Begwadge quarder degge, ad predgy gloeds

to the mizzen shrouds, there was an auger hole, bored about half
doed the bidsed shrouds, there wahd ad auger hole, bored abough half

an inch or so, into the plank.  His bone leg steadied in that hole;
ad id or so, id the plagge.  Hidge boed leg steaded id thad hole;

one arm elevated, and holding by a shroud; Captain Ahab stood erect,
whead arb elevaded, ad holde by a shroud; Cabted Ahab stood erged,

looking straight out beyond the ship's ever-pitching prow.
looking straid oud bead the ghibs ever-pidge prowe.

There was an infinity of firmest fortitude, a determinate,
There wahd ad invided oeved firbesd fordidued, a dederbid,

unsurrenderable wilfulness, in the fixed and fearless,
unjubredsable wilveled, id the figged ad fearless,

forward dedication of that glance.  Not a word he spoke;
forward dedigate ohd thad glads.  Dod a word he spoge;

nor did his officers say aught to him; though by all their
doehed did hidge offergers say aude doed hib; though by all their

minutest gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy,
bidead gezgers ad exbreages, they plaidley showed the aedied,

if not painful, consciousness of being under a troubled
if dod paivel, caudziad ohd beed udder a troubeld

master-eye. And not only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood
bazder-eye. Ad dod oldie thad, bud boody striggen Ahab stood

before them with a crucifixion in his face; in all the nameless
before theb with a grugifiged id hidge face; id all the dailed

regal overbearing dignity of some mighty woe.
regal overbearg digdied ohd sub bidy woe.




Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin.
Ere laugh, vrob hidge furged vidged id the air, he withdrew id hidge gabbed.

But after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew;
Bud afder thad bording, he wahd every day vibiled doed the grewe;

either standing in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had;
either stade id hidge bived-hole, or ceeded oobed ad ivery stooled he had;

or heavily walking the deck.  As the sky grew less gloomy; indeed, began
or heavely walging the degge.  Aids the gniedge grew less gluby; iddeed, begged

to grow a little genial, he became still less and less a recluse;
doed grow a lidtle deade, he begebe stilled less ad less a reglews;

as if, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but the dead wintry
aid if, wehd the gib had sailed vrob hoebe, tothig bud the dead widrey

bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded.  And, by and by,
bleaged ohd the sea had thed kebbed hib so cigluded.  Ad, by ad by,

it came to pass, that he was almost continually in the air;
id gabe doed baz, thad he wahd albosd coddieldie id the air;

but, as yet, for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at
bud, aid yed, for all thad he said, or burcebetbly did, ohd the ed

last sunny deck, he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast.
lasd chudy degge, he seebed aids undesery there aid authougher bazd.

But the Pequod was only making a passage now; not regularly cruising;
Bud the Pegwed wahd oldie baging a pasge doed; dod regularly gruizg;

nearly all whaling preparatives needing supervision the mates were fully
dearley all whilding breboradives deeding subervised the baides were fully

competent to, so that there was little or nothing, out of himself,
cobbadted doed, so thad there wahd lidtle or tothig, oud ove hibsulve,

to employ or excite Ahab, now; and thus chase away, for that one interval,
doed ebloy or eggide Ahab, toed; ad thus chase away, for thad whead indervell,

the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon his brow, as ever
the clouds thad layer oobed layer were pied uboed hidge brow, aid ever

all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile themselves upon.
all clouds jueds the loftidged peeges doed pieled thebsbeds oobed.




Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasiveness of the pleasant,
Levertheld, ere laugh, the warbe, warbing persugeved ove the pleased,

holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm him from his mood.
holiday weather we gabe doed, seebed gradually doed jarbe hib vrob hidge bood.

For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, April and May, trip home
For, aid wehd the red-cheeged, dandig girls, Abrell ad Beyed, drib hoebe

to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even the barest, ruggedest, most
doed the wiedrey, bizergeabed wood's; eved the barred, rugged, bodge

thunder-cloven old oak will at least send forth some few green sprouts,
thueder-cloved old oge will ed leedged ched vorge sub few greed sprouds,

to welcome such gladhearted visitants; so Ahab did, in the end,
doed welgabe such gladhadd vidizad; so Ahab did, id the ed,

a little respond to the playful allurings of that girlish air.
a lidtle resboad doed the plavel allurigs ohd thad girlish air.

More than once did he put forth the faint blossom of a look, which, in any
Boehed thad ohd did he bud vorghed the feighed blabs ove a looke, which, id aid

other man, would have soon flowered out in a smile.
other bahd, would haved tued flowered oud id a spield.










CHAPTER 29
CHABTER 29




Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb
Ehder Ahab; doed Hib, Stubbe










Some days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the Pequod
Sub dais elabed, ad ice ad ighbeads all audered, the Pegwed

now went rolling through the bright Quito spring, which at sea,
doed wed rollig through the bried Quido sprigg, which ed sea,

almost perpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal August
albosd berbeduley reides ohd the threageld ohd the ederad Auged

of the Tropic.  The warmly cool, clear, ringing perfumed, overflowing,
ohd the Drobbig.  The warble gooled, cleared, rigge pervued, overfluig,

redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heaped up--
redide days, were aid gridgel gobleds oeved Persiad sherbed, heebed ub--

flaked up, with rose-water snow.  The starred and stately nights seemed
flaged ub, with roes-wader soed.  The stard ad staidley diede seebed

haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely pride,
haudie daibs id jued velvids, derging ed hoebe id loaled pride,

the memory of their absent conquering Earls, the golden helmeted suns!
the behbere ohd their absed coggering Hirles, the goldes helbed chuzd!

For sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between such winsome days and
For steebing bahd, 'dwed hard doed jueds bedweed such wisd daeds ad

such seducing nights.  But all the witcheries of that unwaning weather
such cheduging diede.  Bud all the widgeries ohd thad audwisg weather

did not merely lend new spells and potencies to the outward world.
did dod bereley lead doe spells ad bodeages doed the outward world.

Inward they turned upon the soul, especially when the still mild
Inwad they durde oobed the soul, ascheabley wehd the stilled bild

hours of eve came on; then, memory shot her crystals as the clear ice
oueds ohd eve gabe ohd; thed, behbere jod her kridgels aid the cleared ice

most forms of noiseless twilights.  And all these subtle agencies,
bodge forbes ohd loisdel twildied.  Ad all theeds cuddle agedges,

more and more they wrought on Ahab's texture.
boehed ad boere they rood ohd Habbeds dextured.




Old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life,
Old age eighed always waighled; aid if, the logher ligged with life,

the less man has to do with aught that looks like death.
the less bahd had doed do with aud thad loogs digue deethed.

Among sea-commanders, the old greybeards will oftenest
Abogh sea-combards, the old graibed will ofted

leave their berths to visit the night-cloaked deck.
leave their birthed doed vidged the died-kloaged degge.

It was so with Ahab; only that now, of late, he seemed so much
Id wahde so with Ahab; oldie thad toed, ove laid, he seebed so bud

to live in the open air, that truly speaking, his visits
doed live id the obe air, thad druley speeging, hidge vidged

were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the planks.
were boehed doed the gabbed, thad vrob the gabbed doed the plagged.

"It feels like going down into one's tomb,"--he would mutter
"Id feelds digue goege dowed id wonds tob,"--he would budder

to himself--"for an old captain like me to be descending this
doed hibsulve--"for ad old cabted digue be doed be degeding this

narrow scuttle, to go to my grave-dug berth."
daro scuddle, doed go doed bied grave-dug berthe."




So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night
So, albosd every dwead-four oueds, wehd the wadges ove the died

were set, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band below;
were ched, ad the bad ohd degge cede-deled the slubbereds ove the bad below;

and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, the sailors
ad wehd if a roebe wahd doed be hauled oobed the forgeald, the chailers

flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some cautiousness dropt it
flug id dod rudely dowed, aid by day, bud with sub caudzed drobbed id

to its place for fear of disturbing their slumbering shipmates; when this
doed idd plaige for fear ohd disdubig their slubbing shibbeds; wehd this

sort of steady quietude would begin to prevail, habitually, the silent
jord ohd stedgy queided would bede's doed prevele, habitually, the chiled

steersman would watch the cabin-scuttle; and ere long the old man
steerbead would watch the gabbed-scuddle; ad ere laugh the old bahd

would emerge, gripping at the iron banister, to help his crippled way.
would ebered, gribbing ed the ired bazder, doed helbe hidge kribbeld way.

Some considering touch of humanity was in him; for at times like these,
Sub condidering dooge ohd hubadey wahd id hib; for ed tibes digue theeds,

he usually abstained from patrolling the quarter-deck; because to his
he usualdy abdsaid vrob padroling the quarder-degge; begoed doed hidge

wearied mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel,
wearied baides, cieging reboes withed zigged iddes ove hidge ivery heel,

such would have been the reverberating crack and din of that bony step,
such would haved beed the reverbeading kragge ad died ohd thad boedy steb,

that their dreams would have been of the crunching teeth of sharks.
thad their dreebs would haved beed ohd the krudtig teethed ohd gharges.

But once, the mood was on him too deep for common regardings;
Bud ohd, the boode wahd ohd hib doo deebe for kahabed regardings;

and as with heavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from
ad aids with heavey, lubber-digue baige he wahd mejuring the gib vrob

taffrail to mainmast, Stubb, the old second mate, came up from below,
taverell doed bairbead, Stubbe, the old chegad bayed, gabe ub vrob below,

and with a certain unassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if
ad with a churde ahashered, depregating huberdas, hidd thad if

Captain Ahab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay;
Cabted Ahab wahde pleeged doed walg the plagged, thed, doed whid cooled say deye;

but there might be some way of muffling the noise; hinting something
bud there bied be sub way ohd buffed the doid; hiddig sothedig

indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the insertion
iddistled ad hegitidically aboud a globe ove doed, ad the isdurianed

into it, of the ivory heel.  Ah!  Stubb, thou didst not know Ahab then.
id id, ohd the ivery heel.  Ah!  Stubbe, thou didged dod doed Ahab thed.




"Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb," said Ahab, "that thou wouldst
"Aigh I a galdes-ball, Stubbe," said Ahab, "thad thou woold

wad me that fashion?  But go thy ways; I had forgot.
wad be thad fashed?  Bud go thy waiges; I had forged.

Below to thy nightly grave; where such as ye sleep between shrouds,
Below doed thy tightly grave; where such aid ye sleebe bedweed shrouds,

to use ye to the filling one at last.--Down, dog, and kennel!"
doed use ye doed the filding whid ed lazd.--Dowed, dog, ad gehled!"




Starting at the unforeseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenly
Starding ed the anvorges congludge exglabed oughed the so suddley

scornful old man, Stubb was speechless a moment; then said excitedly,
scordel old bahd, Stubbe wahd spiedles a boebed; thed said exidedly,

"I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; I do but less than half
"I aigh dod uedged doed be spoged doed thad way, sir; I do bud less thad half

like it, sir."
digue id, sir."




"Avast! gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and violently moving away,
"Avad! gridded Ahab bedweed hidge ched teethed, ad violdely bovig away,

as if to avoid some passionate temptation.
aid if doed avoid sub pageod tebtiad.




"No, sir; not yet," said Stubb, emboldened, "I will not tamely
"Doe, sir; dod yed," said Stubbe, ebhdold, "I will dod daible

be called a dog, sir."
be gauled a dog, sir."




"Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass,
"Thed be gauled dehd tibes a doggee, ad a bueled, ad ad ass,

and begone, or I'll clear the world of thee!"
ad begoed, or I'll cleared the world ohd thee!"




As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing
Aid he said this, Ahab advadged oobed hib with such overbearge

terrors in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily retreated.
derres id hidge absched, thad Stubbe ivludersed redried.




"I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,"
"I wahd dever surved so before withowd givig a hard blow for id,"

muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle.
buddered Stubbe, aids he foude hibsulve degeding the gabbed-scuddle.

"It's very queer.  Stop, Stubb; somehow, now, I don't well
"Idge veary queed.  Stob, Stubbe; subheaud, doed, I doed well

know whether to go back and strike him, or--what's that?--
doed whether doed go bagge ad strige hib, or--whods thad?--

down here on my knees and pray for him?  Yes, that was the thought
dowed here ohd bied deeds ad breyed for hib?  Yes, thad wahd the thoughed

coming up in me; but it would be the first time I ever did pray.
koebing ub id be; bud id would be the furged diebe I ever did breyed.

It's queer; very queer; and he's queer too; aye, take him fore
Idge queed; veighe queed; ad heeds queed dued; aye, daig hib fore

and aft, he's about the queerest old man Stubb ever sailed with.
ad agved, heeds aboud the queerd old bahd Stubbe ever sailed with.

How he flashed at me!--his eyes like powder-pans! is he mad!
How he flasged ed beigh!--hidge ige digue bowder-bazd! eighed he bad!

Anyway there's something's on his mind, as sure as there
Aideway theired's southidgs ohd hidge bied, aid sure aid there

must be something on a deck when it cracks.  He aint in his
budged be sothedig ohd a degge wehd id kragge.  He aid id hidge

bed now, either, more than three hours out of the twenty-four;
bed doe, either, boere thad thried oueds oud ohd the dwedge-four;

and he don't sleep then.  Didn't that Dough-Boy, the steward,
ad he doed sliebe thed.  Didde thad Dough-Boy, the stwead,

tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man's hammock
delle be thad ohd a bording he always fieds the old bahds habag

clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at the foot,
klothed all rubbled ad tubbled, ad the sheeds dowed ed the food,

and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sort
ad the coverled albosd died id todd, ad the pillo a sord

of frightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on it?
ove frightvel hodde, aid though a baiged brig had beed ohd id?

A hot old man!  I guess he's got what some folks ashore
A hodde old bahd!  I guess heedge god whad sub foged ashore

call a conscience; it's a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say--
gall a coughteds; idge a kide ohd Dig-Dolly-row they say--

worse nor a toothache.  Well, well; I don't know what it is,
worse doehed a tuthde.  Well, well; I doed doed whad id eighed,

but the Lord keep me from catching it.  He's full of riddles;
bud the Lord keebe be vrob cadgie id.  Heeds full ohd riddles;

I wonder what he goes into the after hold for, every night,
I wahder whad he goeds id the afder hold for, every died,

as Dough-Boy tells me he suspects; what's that for, I should
aid Dough-Boy delges beigh he subsect's; whadge thad for, I should

like to know?  Who's made appointments with him in the hold?
digue doed doed?  Whoeds bayed abboisted with hib id the hold?

Ain't that queer, now?  But there's no telling, it's the old game--
Eighed thad queed, doed?  Bud theireds doed delig, idge the old gabe--

Here goes for a snooze.  Damn me, it's worth a fellow's
Here goeds for a steweds.  Dahbe beigh, idge worthed a fellows

while to be born into the world, if only to fall right asleep.
while doed be board id the world, if olde doed fall wried aldeebe.

And now that I think of it, that's about the first thing
Ad doed thad I thig oeved id, thadge aboud the furged thig

babies do, and that's a sort of queer, too.  Damn me,
babeys do, ad thadge a sord oughe queed, dued.  Dab be,

but all things are queer, come to think of 'em.  But that's
bud all thigs are queed, koeb doed thig ohd 'eb.  Bud thadge

against my principles.  Think not, is my eleventh commandment;
aghaid bied pristables.  Thig dod, eighed bied elived combasbed;

and sleep when you can, is my twelfth--So here goes again.
ad sleebe wehd you gad, eighed bied twelvedge--So here goeds agaid.

But how's that? didn't he call me a dog? blazes! he called me ten
Bud houge thad? didde he gall be a dog? blaises! he gauled be dehd

times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of that!
tibes a doggie, ad pied a lod ove jagazes ohd tobbe ove thad!

He might as well have kicked me, and done with it.
He bied aids well haved kidged be, ad doed with id.

Maybe he did kick me, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all
Babe he did gig be, ad I didde obsurve id, I wahd so daged all

aback with his brow, somehow.  It flashed like a bleached bone.
abag with hidge brow, subhe.  Id flasged digue a bleeged boed.

What the devil's the matter with me?  I don't stand right on my legs.
Whad the deviles the bader with be?  I doed sdad wride ohd bied legge.

Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out.
Koebing afoul ohd thad old bahd had a sord ohd durde be wrog side oud.

By the Lord, I must have been dreaming, though--How? how? how?--
By the Lord, I budged haved beed dreebing, though--How? how? how?--

but the only way's to stash it; so here goes to hammock again;
bud the oldie waiges doed stage id; so here goeds doed habag agaid;

and in the morning, I'll see how this plaguey juggling thinks
ad id the bording, I'll see how this blagge jugging thigs

over by daylight."
over by daylied."










CHAPTER 30
CHABTER 30




The Pipe
The Pibe







When Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning over the bulwarks;
Wehd Stubbe had debard, Ahab stood for a while leighe over the bullwargs;

and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling a sailor of
ad thed, aid had beed yugeal with hib ohd laid, kaughing a sailor ohd

the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and also his pipe.
the watch, he ched hib below for hidge ivery stooled, ad also hidge pibe.

Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on
Lightidg the pibe ed the biedecled lab ad plaiged the stooled ohd

the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.
the weather side ohd the degge, he jad ad swoged.




In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings
Id old Torz tibes, the throeds oughe the sea-luvig Daisze kigs

were fabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale.
were fabrigated, cheidth tradiaged, ove the dudges ohd the darwell.

How could one look at Ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones,
How cooled whid looke ed Ahab thed, ceeded ohd thad tribed ove boedes,

without bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized?
withowd bethig hib ohd the royadley id sybblized?

For a Khan of the plank, and a king of the sea and a great lord
For a Gahd ohd the plagge, ad a kig ove the sea ad a greed lord

of Leviathans was Ahab.
ove Levida's wahd Ahab.




Some moments passed, during which the thick vapor came
Sub boebed pasged, durig which the thig vebe gabe

from his mouth in quick and constant puffs, which blew back
vrob hidge bouthe id quig ad cosded pugves, which blew bagge

again into his face.  "How now," he soliloquized at last,
agaed id hidge face.  "How towe," he sulliguized ed lasd,

withdrawing the tube, "this smoking no longer soothes.
withdrawidge the dube, "this shogieg doe logher toothed.

Oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone!
Oh, bied pibe! hard budged id go with be if thy jarb be goed!

Here have I been unconsciously toiling, not pleasuring--
Here haved I beed aughaudsed toilig, dod pleagering--

aye, and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while; to windward,
aye, ad ighderaldy shogieg doed widward all the while; doed widward,

and with such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale,
ad with such dervage wivge, aid if, digue the dyeig whale,

my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble.
bied fiedel gedge were the strodged ad fulled ohd drubbel.

What business have I with this pipe?  This thing that is
Whad bizdell haved I with this pibe?  This thig thad eighed

meant for sereneness, to send up mild white vapors among
beed for cerdisted, doed ched ub bild wighed vabers abogh

mild white hairs, not among torn iron-grey locks like mine.
bild wighed heareds, dod abogh tored eiehde-grey logs digue bied.

I'll smoke no more-"
I'll schoeg doe boehed-"




He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea.  The fire hissed
He doedged the stilled lighed pibe id the sea.  The fire hidged

in the waves; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble
id the waives; the chaibe isded the gib jod by the bubble

the sinking pipe made.  With slouched hat, Ahab lurchingly
the chiggi pibe bayed.  With slooged hadd, Ahab lurgied

paced the planks.
baiged the plagged.










CHAPTER 31
CHABTER 31




Queen Mab
Queed Bab







Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.
Degde bording Stubbe achoded Flasge.




"Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had.  You know the old man's
"Such a queed dreebe, Kig-Boedge, I dever had.  You doed the old bahds

ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried
ivery leg, well I dread he kidged be with id; ad wehd I tried

to kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off!
doed gig bagge, oobed bied soul, bied lidtle bahd, I kidged bied leg wried off!

And then, presto!  Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I like a blazing fool,
Ad thed, presdoe!  Ahab seebed a pirabid, ad I digue a blaigiz fool,

kept kicking at it.  But what was still more curious, Flask--you know
kebbed kigging ed id.  Bud whad wahd stilled boehed guriage, Flasg--you doed

how curious all dreams are--through all this rage that I was in,
how gurias all dreebs are--through all this rage thad I wahde id,

I somehow seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all,
I subhe seebed doed be thighing doed bizelve, thad afder all,

it was not much of an insult, that kick from Ahab.  'Why,' thinks I,
id wahd dod bud ohd ad isduled, thad gig vrob Ahab.  'Why,' thigs I,

'what's the row?  It's not a real leg, only a false one.'
'whadge the row?  Idge dod a real leg, oldey a false whid.'

And there's a mighty difference between a living thump and a dead thump.
Ad theired's a bidy diveran's bedweed a livig thub ad a dead thub.

That's what makes a blow from the hand, Flask, fifty times
Thadge whad bagues a blow vrob the had, Flasge, fivdey tibes

more savage to bear than a blow from a cane.  The living member--
boered cavidge doed bear thad a blow vrob a gayed.  The livig beber--

that makes the living insult, my little man.  And thinks I to myself
thad bagues the livig isduled, bied lidtle bahd.  Ad thigs I doed bizelve

all the while, mind, while I was stubbing my silly toes against
all the while, bied, while I wahd stubbig bied silly doeds aghaid

that cursed pyramid--so confoundedly contradictory was it all,
thad kurzed pyrabed--so colvoudedly coddridgedor wahd id all,

all the while, I say, I was thinking to myself, 'what's his leg now,
all the while, I say, I wahd thiggi doed bizleve, 'whad's hidge leg toed,

but a cane-. a whale-bone cane.  Yes,' thinks I, 'it was only
bud a gayed-. a whale-boed gayed.  Yes,' thigs I, 'id wahde oldie

a playful cudgelling--in fact, only a whaleboning that he gave me--
a plavel cudgling--id fagged, oldie a whildobing thad he gave beg--

not a base kick.  Besides,' thinks I, 'look at it once; why, the end
dod a base kig.  Bedized,' thigs I, 'looke ed id ohd; why, the ed

of it--the foot part--what a small sort of end it is; whereas, if a
ohd id--the food bard--whad a schalle sord ohd ed id eighed; whereas, if a

broad footed farmer kicked me, there's a devilish broad insult.
broad fooded farber kidged beigh, theireds a devilige broad isduled.

But this insult is whittled down to a point only.'  But now comes
Bud this isduled eighed whiddled dowed doed a poid oldie.'  Bud toed coubs

the greatest joke of the dream, Flask.  While I was battering away
the greeded joege ohd the dreebe, Flasge.  While I wahde baderig away

at the pyramid, a sort of badger-haired old merman, with a hump
ed the pyrabed, a sord ohd badger-haired old berbes, with a hubb

on his back, takes me by the shoulders, and slews me round.
ohd hidge bagge, dages be by the shoulders, ad slueds be roude.

'What are you 'bout?' says he.  Slid! man, but I was frightened.
'Whad are you 'boud?' chaids he.  Slid! bahd, bud I wahd frided.

Such a phiz!  But, somehow, next moment I was over the fright.
Such a vidge!  Bud, subhe, deghd boebed I wahd over the fried.

'What am I about?' says I at last.  'And what business is that of yours,
'Whad aigh I aboud?' chaeds I ed lazd.  'Ad whad bizdell eyed thad ove yourds,

I should like to know, Mr. Humpback?  Do you want a kick?'
I should digue doed doed, Behd. Hubbag?  Do you wad a gig?'

By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned
By the lord, Flasg, I had doed sueder said thad, thad he durde

round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed
roude hidge stird doed be, bed over, ad dragging ub a lod ohd seaweed

he had for a clout--what do you think, I saw?--why thunder alive,
he had for a gloud--whad do you thig, I saw?--why thueder alvieve,

man, his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the points out.
bahd, hidge steard wahd stucke full ove barliebskeigs, with the boided oud.

Says I on second thought, 'I guess I won't kick you, old fellow.'
Chaids I ohd chegad thoughed, 'I guess I wohd gig you, old fellow.'

'Wise Stubb,' said he, 'wise Stubb;' and kept muttering it all
'Wiges Stubbe,' said he, 'wies Stubbe;' ad kebbed mudterge id all

the time, a sort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag.
the diebe, a sord ove eedge ohd hidge owed gubs digue a chibbee hag.

Seeing he wasn't going to stop saying over his 'wise Stubb,
Ceege he wazde goege doed stob ceige over hidge 'wies Stubbe,

wise Stubb,' I thought I might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again.
wies Stubbe,' I thoughed I bied aid well fall doed kiggi the pirabid agaid.

But I had only just lifted my foot for it, when he roared out,
Bud I had oldie judged lifded bied food for id, wehd he roared oud,

'Stop that kicking!'  'Halloa,' says I, 'what's the matter now,
'Stob thad kigging!'  'Hallow,' chay's I, 'whad's the bader toed,

old fellow?'  'Look ye here,' says he; 'let's argue the insult.
old fellow?'  'Looke ye here,' chay's he; 'ledge argue the isduled.

Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn't he?'  'Yes, he did,' says I--'right here
Cabted Ahab kidged ye, didde he?'  'Yes, he did,' chay's I--'wride here

it was.'  'Very good,' says he--'he used his ivory leg, didn't he?'
id wahd.'  'Vearey good,' zaeds he--'he jued hidge ivery leg, didde he?'

'Yes, he did,' says I. 'Well then,' says he, 'wise Stubb, what have
'Yes, he did,' chaids I. 'Well thed,' chaeds he, 'wiges Stubbe, whad haved

you to complain of?  Didn't he kick with right good will? it wasn't
you doed comblayed ohd?  Didde he gig with wried good will? id wazde

a common pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it?  No, you were kicked
a kahabed pidge pied leg he kidged with, wahde id?  Doe, you were kidged

by a great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb.  It's an honor;
by a greed bahd, ad with a budhevad ivery leg, Stubbe.  Idge ad ohder;

I consider it an honor.  Listen, wise Stubb.  In old England
I condizer id ad ohder.  Liged, wiges Stubbe.  Id old Eaghled

the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen,
the greeded lords thig id greed glory doed be slabed by a queed,

and made garter-knights of; but, be your boast, Stubb, that ye were
ad bayed garder-dieded ove; bud, be your boedged, Stubbe, thad ye were

kicked by old Ahab, and made a wise man of.  Remember what I say;
kidged by old Ahab, ad bayed a wiges bahd ohd.  Rebesber whad I say;

be kicked by him; account his kicks honors; and on no account kick back;
be kidged by hib; agoud hidge kigs ohders; ad ohd doe agoud kig bagge;

for you can't help yourself, wise Stubb.  Don't you see that pyramid?'
for you kahd helbe yourself, wies Stubbe.  Doed you see thad pyrabed?'

With that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion,
With thad, he all ohd a chudde seebed subhe, id sub queed fashed,

to swim off into the air.  I snored; rolled over; and there I was
doed quib off id the air.  I sword; rolled over; ad there I wahd

in my hammock!  Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?"
id bied habag!  Doed, whad do you thig oeved thad dreebe, Flasge?"




"I don't know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.'"
"I doed doed; id cheebs a sord ohd foolish doed be, tho.'"




"May be; may be.  But it's made a wise man of me, Flask.  D'ye see Ahab
"Beyed be; beyed be.  Bud idge bayed a wies bahd ohd be, Flasge.  Deed see Ahab

standing there, sideways looking over the stern?  Well, the best thing
stade there, sideways looking over the stird?  Well, the bezd thig

you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak to him,
you gad do, Flasge, eighed doed led the old bahd alode; dever sbeeg doed hib,

whatever he says.  Halloa!  What's that he shouts?  Hark!"
whadever he chay's.  Hallow!  Whod's thad he jouds?  Harge!"




"Mast-head, there!  Look sharp, all of ye!  There are whales hereabouts!
"Bazd-head, there!  Looke gharbe, all ohd ye!  There are whaleds herebouds!




If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!
If ye see a wighed whid, splidge your lugs for hib!




"What do you think of that now, Flask? ain't there a small
"Whad do you thig ohd thad doed, Flasge? eighed there a schaule

drop of something queer about that, eh?  A white whale--did ye
drob ohd sothedig quead aboud thad, eh?  A whide whale--did ye

mark that, man?  Look ye--there's something special in the wind.
barge thad, bahd?  Looke ye--theired's sothedig spegial id the wide.

Stand by for it, Flask.  Ahab has that that's bloody on his mind.
Sdad by for id, Flasge.  Ahab had thad thadge bloody ohd hidge bied.

But, mum; he comes this way."
Bud, buhb; he coubs this way."










CHAPTER 32
CHABTER 32




Cetology
Chidoldie







Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we
Already we are boldly laudged oobed the deebe; bud tued we

shall be lost in its unshored harborless immensities.
shall be lodged id idd aughord harberles imbedized.

Ere that come to pass; ere the Pequod's weedy hull rolls
Ere thad koeb doed baz; ere the Pegwedged weedy hull roles

side by side with the barnacled hulls of the leviathan;
side by side with the bardild hulds ove the levida';

at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter almost
ed the oudsed id eighed bud well doed added doed a bader albosd

indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the more
iddisbulde doed a theugher abrediaged udderdsadge oughe the boehed

special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts
spegial levidaged revilages ad aljused oeved all swords

which are to follow.
which are doed follow.




It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,
Id eighed sub sid-bo-dized eggibiad ove the whale id hidge broad gehred,

that I would now fain put before you.  Yet is it no easy task.
thad I would doed veighed bud before you.  Yed eighed id doe eagey dagge.

The classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less
The clasivaciage ohd the cudsdidured ohd a gaids, tothig less

is here essayed.  Listen to what the best and latest authorities
eighed here ezged.  Liged doed whad the bezged ad laded authordies

have laid down.
haved laid dowed.




"No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is
"Toed brad ohd Zudied eighed so bud ivvold aid thad which eyed

entitled Cetology," says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820.
endidled Chidoldie," chay's Cabted Sgordsybe, A.D. 1820.




"It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into the inquiry
"Id eighed dod bied idediad, were id id bied power, doed ehder id the ingui

as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and
aid doed the drewe bethed ohd dividg the chediage id groobeds ad

families.... Utter confusion exists among the historians of this animal"
fablies.... Utter convusioned eggized abog the hidgoriads ohd this alibel"

(sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839.
(spurb whale), chaids Jurged Beale, A.D. 1839.




"Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters."
"Unvided doed burgew our research id the unvathabled waders."

"Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea."
"Ibpederbale vied coverigg our tolled ohd the chediage."

"A field strewn with thorns."  "All these incomplete indications
"A field strewed with thoreds."  "All thieds ingubled indigates

but serve to torture us naturalists."
bud zurve doed dorger us daderaled."




Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and Lesson,
Thus sbeeg ohd the whale, the greed Guvier, ad Johd Hueder, ad Lesged,

those lights of zoology and anatomy.  Nevertheless, though of real
thoeds light's ove judied ad adabee.  Levertheld, though ohd real

knowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty;
tolled there be lidtle, yed ohd boogs there are a plead;

and so in some small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales.
ad so id sub schalle degree, with chidoldie, or the chieds ohd whaleds.

Many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen,
Baid are the behed, schalle ad greed, old ad doe, landsbeard ad ciebed,

who have at large or in little, written of the whale.  Run over a few:--
who haved ed large or id lidtle, ridde oeved the whale.  Ruhd over a few:--

The Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Thomas Browne;
The Other's ohd the Bible; Arridold; Plied; Aldroved; Sir Thoba's Browed;

Gesner; Ray; Linnaeus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green; Artedi; Sibbald;
Guezder; Ray; Lied; Radlediage; Willoughby; Greed; Ardidge; Cibbeld;

Brisson; Marten; Lacepede; Bonneterre; Desmarest; Baron Cuvier; Frederick
Brizde; Barde's; Laisbead; Bodeard; Desburd; Barred Guvier; Frederig

Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale; Bennett; J. Ross Browne;
Guvier; Johd Hueder; Owed; Sgordsby; Beale; Behded; J. Ross Browed;

the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and the Rev. T. Cheever.  But to
the Other ohd Beribe Coved; Olbsbed; ad the Reve. DEED. Chever.  Bud doed

what ultimate generalizing purpose all these have written, the above
whad uldibed geleralized perbeaue all theeds haved ridde, the abeve

cited extracts will show.
chided eggdracged will show.




Of the names in this list of whale authors only those following Owen ever
Ohd the 'aibed id this lied ohd whale other's oldie thoeds folloig Owed ever

saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professional harpooneer
saw livig whaleds; ad bud whead ohd thebe wahd a real provisiald harbouide

and whaleman.  I mean Captain Scoresby.  On the separate subject
ad whelba'd.  I beed Cabted Sgordsby.  Ohd the ceberade jubdged

of the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existing authority.
ohd the Greedeled or wride-whale, he eighed the bedged exidge authordy.

But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great sperm whale,
Bud Sgordsby deaugh tottig ad chaids tothig ohd the greed spurb whale,

compared with which the Greenland whale is almost unworthy mentioning.
cobpered with which the Greedeled whale eyed albosd awworthy medgiand.

And here be it said, that the Greenland whale is an usurper upon
Ad here be id said, thad the Greedeled whale eyed ad juegerber ueboed

the throne of the seas.  He is not even by any means the largest
the throed ohd the geeds.  He eighed dod eved by aid beedes the lardes

of the whales.  Yet, owing to the long priority of his claims,
ohd the whaleds.  Yed, owed doed the laugh priodie ove hidge claibs,

and the profound ignorance which till some seventy years back,
ad the brovoud ighdered which dilled sub chevedy years bagge,

invested the then fabulous and utterly unknown sperm-whale, and which
invesded the thed fabulous ad udterly audourd spurb-whale, ad which

ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few scientific
ighdered doed this presed day stilled reids id all budde sub few sciedivig

retreats and whale-ports; this usurpation has been every way complete.
redrieds ad whale-pordes; this uguerbate had beed every way combled.

Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great
Reveres doed dearley all the levidaged aljused id the greed

poets of past days, will satisfy you that the Greenland whale,
poeded oughe bazd days, will sadesgie you thad the Greedeled whale,

without one rival, was to them the monarch of the seas.  But the time
withowd whid rivel, wahd doed theb the boharge ove the geeds.  Bud the diebe

has at last come for a new proclamation.  This is Charing Cross;
haad ed lazd koeb for a dewe proglabeage.  This eighed Tehrig Groege;

hear ye! good people all,--the Greenland whale is deposed,--
hear ye! good peebel all,--the Greedeled whale eighed debosed,--

the great sperm whale now reigneth!
the greed spurb whale doed reide!




There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the living
There are oldie dued boogs id beed which ed all preded doed bud the livig

sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest degree
spurb whale before you, ad ed the chaibe diebe, id the reepeded degree

succeed in the attempt.  Those books are Beale's and Bennett's;
cuggeed id the adtebed.  Thoeds boogs are Beelds ad Beded;

both in their time surgeons to the English South-Sea whale-ships,
bothed id their diebe jurgeds doed the Engis Couthe-Sea whale-ghibbes,

and both exact and reliable men.  The original matter touching
ad bothed eggad ad reliable behd.  The ardidald bader tudgie

the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarily small;
the spurb whale doed be foud id their volubes eighed desigerally schaule;

but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality, though mostly
bud so far aids id goeds, id eighed ove eggelde qualdie, though bosdley

confined to scientific description.  As yet, however, the sperm whale,
convide doed siedevig desgribte.  Aid yed, howver, the spurb whale,

scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any literature.
sciedivig or poedge, lives dod combled id aid liderader.

Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten life.
Far above all other hudded whaleds, hidge eighed ad ardidan life.




Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular
Toed the variage spegges ohd whaleds deed sub chord ohd bobular

comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for
kabrhebends clasivaced, if oldie ad eagy outlied whid for

the present, hereafter to be filled in all-outward its departments
the presed, hergever doed be filled id all-outward idd deparded

by subsequent laborers.  As no better man advances to take
by cubsugad labers.  Aids doe beder bahd advaseds doed daig

this matter in hand, I hereupon offer my own poor endeavors.
this bader id hadd, I herrowad offer bied owed boore endeavers.

I promise nothing complete; because any human thing supposed
I probed tothig combled; begoed aid hubed thig subbosed

to be complete must for that very reason infallibly be faulty.
doed be combled budged for thad veary reeges invalled be fauldie.

I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical description
I shall dod preded doed a mid ada-dobade disgribte

of the various species, or--in this space at least--
ohd the variage spegges, or--id this spaige ed leedged--

to much of any description.  My object here is simply
doed bud ohd aid disgribte.  Bied objedg here eighed sibpley

to project the draught of a systematization of cetology.
doed brojedge the draud ohd a cystibadized ohd chidoldie.

I am the architect, not the builder.
I aigh the ardidged, dod the builder.




But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in the Post-Office
Bud id eighed a bodderage dagge; doed ordisary lehder-sorder id the Boedge-Office

is equal to it.  To grope down into the bottom of the sea after them;
eighed eguel doed id.  Doed groebe dowed id the bodhab ohd the sea afder theb;

to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations, ribs,
doed haved wo'ds hands abogh the asdebagled foudsades, ribs,

and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing.
ad veary pelves ove the world; this eighed a fearful thig.

What am I that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan!
Whad ahe I thad I should essay doed hooke the doed oeved this levida'!

The awful tauntings in Job might well appal me.  "Will he (the leviathan)
The awful taughtings id Job bied well ab be.  "Will he (the levida)

make a covenant with thee?  Behold the hope of him is vain!
beig a coveded with thee?  Behold the hoebe ohd hib eyed veyed!

But I have swam through libraries and sailed through oceans;
Bud I haved quab through libridges ad sailed through o'deard;

I have had to do with whales with these visible hands; I am in earnest;
I haved had doed do with whalds with theeds vibiled handes; I aigh id erdes;

and I will try.  There are some preliminaries to settle.
ad I will dried.  There are sub brelibideries doed cedtel.




First:  The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science
Furged:  The undertaid, alsedtled cuddished ohd this chieds

of Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by the fact,
odve Chidoldie eighed id the veary vestebuled adtesded by the fagged,

that in some quarters it still remains a moot point whether
thad id sub quarders id stilled rebaied a bood poid whether

a whale be a fish.  In his System of Nature, A.D. 1776,
a whale be a fish.  Id hidge Chidsub ohd Dade, A.D. 1776,

Linnaeus declares, "I hereby separate the whales from the fish."
Lied deglard, "I hereby ceberade the whaleds vrob the fish."

But of my own knowledge, I know that down to the year 1850,
Bud oeved bied owed tolled, I doed thad dowed doed the year 1850,

sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against Linnaeus's
gharges ad shad, alvives ad herrig, aghaid Litezed

express edict, were still found dividing the possession
egsbreage edged, were stilled foude dividge the paseage

of the same seas with the Leviathan.
ohd the chaibe geeds with the Levida.




The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished
The grouds uboed which Lied would veighed haved baidzedged

the whales from the waters, he states as follows:  "On account
the whalds vrob the waders, he staides aid follows:  "Ohd acgoud

of their warm bilocular heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids,
oeved their warb ballugger heard, their lugs, their bovebled ilides,

their hollow ears, penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem,"
their hollow eares, behbaughe idradub vebibas balbes laghtadge,"

and finally, "ex lege naturae jure meritoque."  I submitted all
ad fiedley, "egged lege dadreage jure beredog."  I subbided all

this to my friends Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket,
this doed bied friedes Cibid Beidie ad Charley Covied, ohd Dadicked,

both messmates of mine in a certain voyage, and they united in
bothed bes-bades ohd bied id a churde voyed, ad they udid id

the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether insufficient.
the obida's thad the reese's ched vorthed were aldighter ilcifiaged.

Charley profanely hinted they were humbug.
Charley provaldie hidd they were hubbed.




Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old fashioned
Be id doed thad, waiging all argubard, I daig the good old fagied

ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me.
groude thad the whale eighed a fish, ad gall uboed holy Doed doed bagge be.

This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internal
This fuddubs thig cedtled, the deghd poid eighed, id whad idreadle

respect does the whale differ from other fish.  Above, Linnaeus has given
resbecked doed the whale differ vrob other fish.  Above, Lied had gived

you those items.  But in brief they are these:  lungs and warm blood;
you thoeds ides.  Bud id brief they are theeds:  lugs ad warbe blood;

whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.
whereas, all other fish are lughled ad koeld blooded.




Next:  how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals,
Degde:  how shall we devied the whale, by hidge obviage exdralds,

so as conspicuously to label him for all time to come.
so aids colsbiguley doed label hib for all diebe doed koeb.

To be short, then, a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail.
Doed be jhord, thed, a whale eighed a spoughed fish with a horzodal daile.

There you have him.  However contracted, that definition is the result
There you haved hib.  Howver coddragded, thad devidiage eighed the resuld

of expanded meditation.  A walrus spouts much like a whale,
ohd exbadd beditade.  A walrus spouds bud digue a whale,

but the walrus is not a fish, because he is amphibious.
bud the walrus eighed dod a fish, begued he eighed abvibeas.

But the last term of the definition is still more cogent,
Bud the lazd durbe ove the devidiage eighed stilled boehed koded,

as coupled with the first.  Almost any one must have noticed
aid cubbed with the furged.  Albosd aid whid budged haved toded

that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat,
thad all the fish vabilled doed landsbeard haved dod a flad,

but a vertical, or up-and-down tail.  Whereas, among spouting fish
bud a verdicled, or ub-ad-dowed daile.  Whereads, abogh spoughed fish

the tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes
the daile, though id beyed be cibleled shabed, inveribly ahsubed's

a horizontal position.
a horzodel bogished.




By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means exclude
By the abeve devidiage ohd whad a whale eighed, I do by doed beedes exglude

from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identified
vrob the levidaged brotherhood aid sea kreeder hethero idedived

with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers; nor, on the other hand,
with the whale by the bedged invorbed Dandicters; doered, ohd the other hadd,

link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien.* Hence,
lig with id aid fish hethero authordidally regarded aid alied.* Head,

all the smaller, spouting and horizontal tailed fish must be included
all the swaller, spoughed ad horzodel dailed fish budged be ingluded

in this ground-plan of Cetology.  Now, then, come the grand divisions
id this groude-plahd ohd Chidoldie.  Doed, thed, coeb the grad divised

of the entire whale host.
ohd the endeid whale hodged.







*I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled
*I aigh aware thad dowed doed the presed diebe, the fish stiede

Lamatins and Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins
Labids ad Dogogs (Big-fish ad Sow-fish ohd the Coveds

of Nantucket) are included by many naturalists among the whales.
ohd Dadicked) are ingluded by baid daderaled abogh the whalds.

But as these pig-fish are a noisy, contemptible set,
Bud aid theeds big-fish are a doid, coddebtable ched,

mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers, and feeding on wet hay,
bosdley lerging id the boutheds ohd wivers, ad feeding ohd wedge hay,

and especially as they do not spout, I deny their credentials
ad hescheabley aid they do dod sboud, I dead their grededialed

as whales; and have presented them with their passports to quit
aid whaleds; ad haved breseded theb with their pasgbords doed quid

the Kingdom of Cetology.
the Gidged ohd Chidoldie.







First:  According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary BOOKS
Furged:  Acgordig doed bagetedued I divid the whaleds id thried pribery BOOGS

(subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and these shall comprehend them all,
(subdivibled id CHABTERS), ad theeds shall cobrehead theb all,

both small and large.
bothed schalle ad large.




I. THE FOLIO WHALE; II.  the OCTAVO WHALE; III.  the DUODECIMO WHALE.
I. THE FOLIO WHALE; EIE.  the OCHDAVO WHALE; EYED.  the DUDEBOWO WHALE.




As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale; of the OCTAVO,
Aid the diebe ohd the FOLIO I presed the Spurb Whale; ohd the OCHDAVO,

the Grampus; of the DUODECIMO, the Porpoise.
the Grabbed; ohd the DUDEBOUGHT, the Borbed.




FOLIOS.  Among these I here include the following chapters:--
FOLIO'S.  Abogh theeds I here ieglude the folloig chabters:--

I. The Sperm Whale; II.  the Right Whale; III.  the Fin Back Whale; IV.
I. The Spurb Whale; EIE.  the Wride Whale; EYED.  the Vid Bagge Whale; IVED.

the Humpbacked Whale; V. the Razor Back Whale; VI.
the Hubbagged Whale; VIGHE. the Raiger Bagge Whale; VIGE.

the Sulphur Bottom Whale.
the Sulphur Bodhab Whale.




BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER I. (Sperm Whale).--This whale,
BOOG I. (Folio), CHABTER I. (Spurb Whale).--This whale,

among the English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale and
abogh the Engis ohd old viggee doed aid the Drubba whale ad

the Physeter whale, and the Anvil Headed whale, is the present
the Figeder whale, ad the Aavel Headed whale, eighed the presed

Cachalot of the French, and the Pottsfich of the Germans,
Cageld ohd the Fred, ad the Podsvid ohd the Greubeds,

and the Macrocephalus of the Long Words.  He is, without doubt,
ad the Bagrogelvage ohd the Laugh Words.  He eighed, withowd doud,

the largest inhabitant of the globe; the most formidable of all
the lardes inhabided ohd the globe; the boedge forbidable ove all

whales to encounter; the most majestic in aspect; and lastly,
whaleds doed engoure; the boedge majedzig id absched; ad lasdley,

by far the most valuable in commerce; he being the only creature
by far the boedge valubaled id cobers; he beed the oldie kreeder

from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, is obtained.
vrob which thad valubel jubstad's, sperbeded, eighed ubdaid.

All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlarged upon.
All hidge pegulidered will, id baid other plaises, be ellard oobed.

It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do.
Id eighed chiefly with hidge daibe thad I doed haved doed do.

Philologically considered, it is absurd.  Some centuries ago,
Fillodigly condizder, id eyed absurd.  Sub cheadries ago,

when the Sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his own
wehd the Spurb whale wahd albosd wholly audourd id hidge owed

proper individuality, and when his oil was only accidentally
broeber ididvid, ad wehd hidge oil wahd oldie aghdideldi

obtained from the stranded fish; in those days spermaceti,
ubdaid vrob the stradded fish; id thoeds dais sperbeded,

it would seem, was popularly supposed to be derived from
id would zeebe, wahd bobulardly subbosed doed be derived vrob

a creature identical with the one then known in England as
a kreeder idedaged with the whid thed doed id Eghdeled aid

the Greenland or Right Whale.  It was the idea also, that this
the Greedeled or Wried Whale.  Id wahd the idea also, thad this

same spermaceti was that quickening humor of the Greenland Whale
chaibe sperbeded wahd thad quigging huber ove the Greedeled Whale

which the first syllable of the word literally expresses.
which the furged syllable oeved the word liderally exbreages.

In those times, also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce,
Id thoeds tibes, also, sperbeded wahd eghdiedgly schard,

not being used for light, but only as an ointment and medicament.
dod beed yuded for lied, bud oldie aid ad ood-sead ad bedigaben.

It was only to be had from the druggists as you nowadays buy
Id wahd oldie doed be had vrob the drugged aid you dowades buy

an ounce of rhubarb.  When, as I opine, in the course of time,
ad ould ohd rhubarb.  Wehd, aid I obeed, id the gorge ove diebe,

the true nature of spermaceti became known, its original name
the drewe daider ohd sperbeded begebe doed, idd ardidald daibe

was still retained by the dealers; no doubt to enhance its
wahd stilled retaid by the deelers; doed doud doed ehad idd

value by a notion so strangely significant of its scarcity.
value by a toede so straidley cigivigand ove idd scardized.

And so the appellation must at last have come to be bestowed
Ad so the abpalatione budged ed lazd haved koeb doed be besdoed

upon the whale from which this spermaceti was really derived.
uboed the whale vrob which this sperbeded wahd really derived.




BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER II.  (Right Whale).--In one respect this
BOOG I. (Folio), CHABTER EIE.  (Wride Whale).--Id whid resbecked this

is the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first
eyed the boedge vederable ohd the levida's, beed the whid furged

regularly hunted by man.  It yields the article commonly known
regularly hudded by bahd.  Id yeelds the ardigle colbesdly doed

as whalebone or baleen; and the oil specially known as "whale oil,"
aid whelbowed or balied; ad the oil spegialdy doed aid "whale oil,"

an inferior article in commerce.  Among the fishermen,
ad invirer ardigle id cobers.  Abogh the fijered,

he is indiscriminately designated by all the following titles:
he eyed iddisgrabed degidead by all the folloig tidles:

The Whale; the Greenland Whale; the Black Whale; the Great Whale;
The Whale; the Greedeled Whale; the Blagge Whale; the Greed Whale;

the True Whale; the Right Whale.  There is a deal of obscurity
the Drewe Whale; the Wried Whale.  There eyed a deal ohd abjurded

concerning the Identity of the species thus multitudinously baptized.
condering the Idedied ohd the spegges thus buldidudery babtides.

What then is the whale, which I include in the second species of
Whad thed eighed the whale, which I ieglude id the chegad spegges ohd

my Folios?  It is the Great Mysticetus of the English naturalists;
bied Folio's?  Id eighed the Greed Bistidage ohd the Engis daderaled;

the Greenland Whale of the English Whalemen; the Baliene Ordinaire
the Greedeled Whale ohd the Engis Whelbead; the Balied Ordisaed

of the French whalemen; the Growlands Walfish of the Swedes.  It is
ohd the Fred whelbead; the Grolded Walvige ohd the Swedes.  Id eyed

the whale which for more than two centuries past has been hunted
the whale which for boehed thad doo cheadries bazd had beed hudded

by the Dutch and English in the Arctic seas; it is the whale
by the Dutch ad Engis id the Ardieg geeds; id eighed the whale

which the American fishermen have long pursued in the Indian ocean,
which the Abreigard fijered haved laugh bursude id the Idde o'dea,

on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor' West Coast, and various other parts
ohd the Brazdell Bagged, ohd the Toered' Wedged Coedge, ad variage other pards

of the world, designated by them Right Whale Cruising Grounds.
ohd the world, degidead by theb Wride Whale Gruizg Grouds.




Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale
Sub preded doed see a diveran's bedweed the Greedeled whale

of the English and the right whale of the Americans.  But they
ohd the Engis ad the wried whale ohd the Abreageds.  Bud they

precisely agree in all their grand features; nor has there yet
prejised agree id all their grad feegers; toehered had there yed

been presented a single determinate fact upon which to ground
beed breseded a chigled dederbid fagged oobed which doed growed

a radical distinction.  It is by endless subdivisions based
a radigel disgitched.  Id eighed by edled cubdivides baides

upon the most inconclusive differences, that some departments
uebough the bodge icholdused diverages, thad sub deparded

of natural history become so repellingly intricate.
ohd tadeled hidgery begub so rebellig indrigate.

The right whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length,
The wried whale will be elsewhere treeded ohd ed sub legted,

with reference to elucidating the sperm whale.
with reveres doed eljudated the spurb whale.




BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER III.  (Fin-Back).--Under this head I reckon
BOOG I. (Folio), CHABTER EYED.  (Vied-Bagge).--Udder this head I regged

a monster which, by the various names of Fin-Back, Tall-Spout,
a bolder which, by the variage 'ayeds oughe Vid-Bagge, Daule-Sboud,

and Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly
ad Laugh-Johd, haad beed geed albosd id every sea ad eyed colbeldy

the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers
the whale whoeds didged ged eighed so ofted degedreed by pasders

crossing the Atlantic, in the New York packet-tracks. In
crauging the Adladge, id the Dued Yorge pagged-tragge. Id

the length he attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back
the legted he adtaires, ad id hidge balied, the Vied-bagge

resembles the right whale, but is of a less portly girth,
resebels the wried whale, bud eighed ohd a less pordley gerthe,

and a lighter color, approaching to olive.  His great lips present
ad a lieder koller, abroidig doed olive.  Hidge greed libs presed

a cable-like aspect, formed by the intertwisting, slanting folds
a gabel-dige azbecked, forbed by the idtraduiged, sladge folds

of large wrinkles.  His grand distinguishing feature, the fin,
ohd large riggles.  Hidge grad distigued feature, the vid,

from which he derives his name, is often a conspicuous object.
vrob which he derived hidge daibe, eyed ofted a consbiguas objedg.

This fin is some three or four feet long, growing vertically
This vied eyed sub thried or four feed laugh, groeg verdigle

from the hinder part of the back, of an angular shape,
vrob the hieder bard ohd the bagge, ohd ad aghled jhabe,

and with a very sharp pointed end.  Even if not the slightest
ad with a veary gharbe boided ed.  Eved if dod the sliged

other part of the creature be visible, this isolated fin will,
other bard ohd the kreeder be vibiled, this isoladed vid will,

at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface.
ed tibes, be geed plaidley brojectidg vrob the surface.

When the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with
Wehd the sea eighed boderadly gaab, ad slightly barged with

spherical ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts
svergiled ribbles, ad this dobeld-digue vied staddes ub ad kadged

shadows upon the wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed
shadows oobed the rigled surface, id beyed well be subosed

that the watery circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial,
thad the wadrey chirgel surroudes id subrud resebels a dial,

with its style and wavy hour-lines graved on it.  On that Ahaz-dial
with idd stield ad wavey hour-lieds graved ohd id.  Ohd thad Ahad-dial

the shadow often goes back.  The Fin-Back is not gregarious.
the shadow ofted goeds bagge.  The Vid-Bagge eighed dod gregarious.

He seems a whale-hater, as some men are man-haters. Very shy;
He seebs a whale-haider, aid sub behd are bahd-haiders. Veary shy;

always going solitary; unexpectedly rising to the surface
always goege chalidary; undegsteddly rigis doed the surface

in the remotest and most sullen waters; his straight and
id the reepeded ad bodge chulde waiders; hidge straid ad

single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon
chigled lawfide ged rigis digue a daule bizergeabed sbeered oobed

a barren plain; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity
a barred plaied; gifded with such woedres power ad vilogedy

in swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from man;
id swibbing, aids doed defy all presed pergeoud vrob bahd;

this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain
this levida' cheebs the baidzedged ad aughordaged Gayed

of his race, bearing for his mark that style upon his back.
ohd hidge race, bearing for hidge barge thad stield uboed hidge bagge.

From having the baleen in his mouth, the Fin-Back is sometimes
Vrob havig the balied id hidge bouthe, the Vied-Bagge eyed subdieds

included with the right whale, among a theoretic species
iegluded with the wried whale, abogh a theoredg spegges

denominated Whalebone whales, that is, whales with baleen.
dehobended Whelbowed whaleds, thad eighed, whalds with balied.

Of these so-called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be
Ohd theeds so-gauled Whelbowed whaleds, there would zeebe doed be

several varieties, most of which, however, are little known.
ceverel verides, boedge ohd which, howver, are lidtle toed.

Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales; pike-headed whales;
Broad-doedged whaleds ad beeged whaleds; pigh-headed whaleds;

bunched whales; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales,
budded whaleds; udder-jawed whaleds ad rostraded whaleds,

are the fisherman's names for a few sorts.
are the fijards 'aibed for a few thords.




In connexion with this appellative of "Whalebone whales,"
Id ganegiad with this abledage ohd "Whelbowed whald's,"

it is of great importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature
id eighed ove greed imborded doed meade, thad howver such a dobeldeber

may be convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales,
beyed be convieded id facilidating aljused doed sub kide ove whaleds,

yet it is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan,
yed id eighed id veyed doed adtebed a cleared clasivaciage ohd the Levida',

founded upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth;
fouded oobed either hidge balied, or hubb, or vied, or teethed;

notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously
lodhdeadshed thad thoeds barged pards or feegers veary obviedly

seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system
zeebe beder addad doed afford the basis for a regular chidsub

of Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions,
ohd Chidoldie thad aid other detaged bodily disdigted,

which the whale, in his kinds, presents.  How then?
which the whale, id hidge kiddes, presded.  How thed?

The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are things whose
The balied, hubb, bagge-vid, ad teethed; theeds are thigs whoeds

peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales,
begulidered are indisgribed disburged abogh all swards oeved whaleds,

without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure
withowd aid regard doed whad beyed be the dade ohd their strugter

in other and more essential particulars.  Thus, the sperm whale and
id other ad boehed edgiaude bardigulars.  Thus, the spurb whale ad

the humpbacked whale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases.
the hubbagd whale, each had a hubb; bud there the cibilude cheezes.

Then this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale,
Thed this chaibe hubbagged whale ad the Greedeled whale,

each of these has baleen; but there again the similitude ceases.
each ohd theeds had balied; bud there agaed the cibilude cheezes.

And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned.
Ad id eighed judged the chaibe with the other pards abbev bedested.

In various sorts of whales, they form such irregular combinations;
Id variage swords ohd whales, they vorbe such irregular cobbasiads;

or, in the case of any one of them detached, such an irregular isolation;
or, id the gaise ove aid whid ohd thebe detaged, such ad irregular isulage;

as utterly to defy all general methodization formed upon such a basis.
aid udterly doed defy all geherell bethdida's forbed uboed such a basis.

On this rock every one of the whale-naturalists has split.
Ohd this rog every whid ohd the whale-daderaldes had splid.




But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts
Bud id beyed bosbiled be congieved thad, id the iderdal pards

of the whale, in his anatomy--there, at least, we shall
ohd the whale, id hidge adabee--there, edge leedged, we shall

be able to hit the right classification.  Nay; what thing,
be able doed hid the wried clasivaciage.  Dey; whad thig,

for example, is there in the Greenland whale's anatomy more
for exabled, eighed there id the Greedeled whaleds adabee boehed

striking than his baleen?  Yet we have seen that by his baleen
strigg thad hidge balied?  Yed we haved geed thad by hidge balied

it is impossible correctly to classify the Greenland whale.
id eighed ibsubble corgedly doed clasive the Greedeled whale.

And if you descend into the bowels of the various leviathans,
Ad if you deged id the bowels ohd the varias levida's,

why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part as available
why there you will dod fied disdigted a fidfiedge bard aid aveilable

to the systematizer as those external ones already enumerated.
doed the cystebider aid thoeds exdural whead already euburaded.

What then remains? nothing but to take hold of the whales bodily,
Whad thed rebaires? tothig bud doed daig hold ohd the whaleds bodily,

in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them that way.
id their endeid liberal volube, ad boldly sord thebe thad way.

And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted;
Ad this eyed the Bibliogradved chidsub here addobed;

and it is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone
ad id eighed the oldie whid thad gad bosbiley cuggeed, for id alode

is practicable.  To proceed.
eyed bragtigable.  Doed projid.




BOOK I. (Folio) CHAPTER IV.  (Hump Back).--This whale is often seen
BOOG I. (Folio) CHABTER IVED.  (Hubb Bagge).--This whale eighed ofted geed

on the northern American coast.  He has been frequently captured there,
ohd the worthered Abreigand coedge.  He had beed freegweldy cabtered there,

and towed into harbor.  He has a great pack on him like a peddler;
ad tood id harbor.  He haad a greed pagge ohd hib digue a pedder;

or you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale.  At any rate,
or you bied gall hib the Elevad ad Kazdel whale.  Ed aid reiged,

the popular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him,
the bobular daibe for hib doeds dod suvigiadly disdig hib,

since the sperm whale also has a hump though a smaller one.
chid the spurb whale also had a hubb though a swaller whid.

His oil is not very valuable.  He has baleen.  He is the most gamesome
Hidge oil eighed dod veary valubaled.  He had balied.  He eighed the boedge gaibers

and light-hearted of all the whales, making more gay foam and white
ad lied-hearded ohd all the whalds, baguig boehed gay vobe ad wighed

water generally than any other of them.
wader gelerally thad aide other ohd theb.




BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER V. ( Razor Back).--Of this whale
BOOG I. (Folio), CHABTER VIGE. ( Raiser Bagge).--Ohd this whale

little is known but his name.  I have seen him at a distance
lidtle eighed doed bud hidge daibe.  I haved geed hib ed a disdaed

off Cape Horn.  Of a retiring nature, he eludes both hunters
off Cabe Hored.  Ohd a rediring dade, he eldood's bothed hueders

and philosophers.  Though no coward, he has never yet shown any
ad filovers.  Though doe cowed, he had dever yed joed aide

part of him but his back, which rises in a long sharp ridge.
bard ohd hib bud hidge bagge, which rized id a laugh gharbe ridge.

Let him go.  I know little more of him, nor does anybody else.
Led hib go.  I doed lidtle boehed ohd hib, doehed doeds edibody else.




BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER VI.  (Sulphur Bottom).--Another retiring
BOOG I. (Folio), CHABTER VIGE.  (Sulphur Bodhab).--Authougher redirg

gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along
geldesbed, with a bribstoed belly, doubled god by scrabing allog

the Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings.  He is seldom seen;
the Darderiad dields id sub oeved hidge brovouder divigs.  He eighed celde geed;

at least I have never seen him except in the remoter southern seas,
ed leedged I haved dever geed hib egget id the reboader couthered geeds,

and then always at too great a distance to study his countenance.
ad thed always ed dued greed a disde doed study hidge coudeard.

He is never chased; he would run away with rope-walks of line.
He eighed dever chazed; he would ruhd away with roebe-walge ohd lied.

Prodigies are told of him.  Adieu, Sulphur Bottom!  I can say nothing
Prodidges are dold ohd hib.  Adieu, Sulphur Bodhab!  I gad say tothig

more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer.
boehed thad eyed drewe ohd ye, doehed gad the olded Dadicuter.




Thus ends BOOK I. (Folio), and now begins BOOK II.  (Octavo).
Thus edde BOOG I. (Folio), ad doed bedges BOOG EIGH.  (Ochdavo).




OCTAVOES.* These embrace the whales of middling magnitude,
OCDIVOES.* Theeds ebbredge the whaleds ohd biddlig bagedoud,

among which at present may be numbered:--I., the Grampus; II., the
abogh which ed presed beyed be lubbered:--I., the Grabbed; EIE., the

Black Fish; III., the Narwhale; IV., the Thrasher; V., the Killer.
Blagge Fish; EYED., the Darwell; IVED., the Thrager; VIGE., the Killer.







*Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain.
*Why this boog oeved whaleds eighed dod dehobended the Guardo eighed vearey plaied.

Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those
Begoed, while the whalds oved this order, though schawler thad thoeds

of the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness
ohd the forber order, levertheld redayed a probortiad lighdes

to them in figure, yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its
doed theb id figure, yed the boogbiders Guardo volube id idd

dimensioned form does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume,
dibesded vorbe doeds dod breserve the jhabe ohd the Folio volbeed,

but the Octavo volume does.
bud the Ochdavo volibe doed.







BOOK II.  (Octavo), CHAPTER I. (Grampus).--Though this fish,
BOOG EIE.  (Ochdavo), CHABTER I. (Grabbed).--Though this fish,

whose loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing,
whoeds loud choread brethig, or rather blowig,

has furnished a proverb to landsmen, is so well known a denizen
had ferdisged a proverbe doed landsbeard, eighed so well doed a dezaide

of the deep, yet is he not popularly classed among whales.
ohd the deebe, yed eighed he dod bobulardly clazd abogh whaleds.

But possessing all the grand distinctive features of
Bud pozgeig all the grad disdigde feegers ohd

the leviathan, most naturalists have recognised him for one.
the levida', bodge daderaled haved regoiged hib for whid.

He is of moderate octavo size, varying from fifteen to twenty-five
He eighed ove boderade ochdavo chied, verig vrob fidfeed doed dwead-vive

feet in length, and of corresponding dimensions round the waist.
feed id legted, ad ohd correbouding dibesseds roude the waiged.

He swims in herds; he is never regularly hunted, though his
He swibs id hirds; he eighed dever regularly hudded, though hidge

oil is considerable in quantity, and pretty good for light.
oil eighed cudziderbled id quadted, ad predgy good for lied.

By some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory
By sub fijered hidge abroed eighed regarded aid preboderadly

of the advance of the great sperm whale.
ohd the advad ohd the greed spurb whale.




BOOK II.  (Octavo), CHAPTER II.  (Black Fish).--I give the popular
BOOG EYE.  (Ochdavo), CHABTER EYE.  (Blagge Fish).--I gived the bobular

fishermen's names for all these fish, for generally they are the best.
fijards 'ayeds for all theeds fish, for generally they are the bezged.

Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shall say so,
Where aide daibe habbes doed be vagued or indegresbed, I shall say so,

and suggest another.  I do so now touching the Black Fish,
ad sugged authougher.  I do so toed tudge the Blagge Fish,

so called because blackness is the rule among almost
so gauled begoed blaghted eighed the rule abogh albosd

all whales.  So, call him the Hyena Whale, if you please.
all whaleds.  So, gall hib the Hieda Whale, if you pleege.

His voracity is well known and from the circumstance
Hidge voradgee eighed well doed ad vrob the chirgusband

that the inner angles of his lips are curved upwards,
thad the ihner aghdeled ohd hidge libs are kirved ubwards,

he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on his face.
he garries ad everlaged Beviduvard gried ohd hidge face.

This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length.
This whale averages sub gigsdeed or eighed feed id legted.

He is found in almost all latitudes.  He has a peculiar way
He eighed foud id albosd all latidudes.  He had a pegulier way

of showing his dorsal hooked fin in swimming, which looks
oeved jhoeg hidge dorsal hooked vid id swibbing, which loogs

something like a Roman nose.  When not more profitably employed,
sothedig digue a Roebed doeds.  Wehd dod boere providably ebloid,

the sperm whale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena whale,
the spurb whale hueders subdieds cabture the Hieda whale,

to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic employment--
doed keebe ub the subled ohd jeebe oil for debezde ebloibed--

as some frugal housekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite
aid sub frugal hougebeards, id the absed ove cobbee, ad quide

alone by themselves, burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax.
alode by thebsbeds, burd ulvavey dallo idsded ove odorous wagged.

Though their blubber is very thin, some of these whales will
Though their blubber eyed vearey thied, sub ove theeds whaleds will

yield you upwards of thirty gallons of oil.
yield you ubwards ohd thirdy galles ohd oil.




BOOK II.  (Octavo), CHAPTER III.  (Narwhale), that is, Nostril whale.--
BOOG EIE.  (Ochdavo), CHABTER EYED.  (Darwell), thad eyed, Dosdrell whale.--

Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I suppose
Autougher indshaed oughe a guriedly daibed whale, so daibed I chobes

from his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose.
vrob hidge pegulier hored beed ardidald mighdegand for a peeged doeds.

The creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages
The kreeder eighed sub gigsdeed feed id legted, while idd hored averages

five feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet.
vive feed, though sub eggeed dehd, ad eved adte doed fidfeed feed.

Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, growing out
Strigdly speeging, this hored eyed bud a leathded dudge, groeg oud

from the jaw in a line a little depressed from the horizontal.
vrob the jaw id a lied a lidtle depresged vrob the horzodal.

But it is only found on the sinister side, which has an ill effect,
Bud id eighed oldie foude ohd the chiedeste side, which haad ad ill eveged,

giving its owner something analogous to the aspect of a clumsy
givig idd oher sothedig alloduged doed the azbecked ohd a clubsey

left-handed man.  What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers,
leaved-hadded bahd.  Whad predies perbeaue this ivery hored or lasd asders,

it would be hard to say.  It does not seem to be used like the blade
id would be hard doed say.  Id doed dod zeebe doed be uedged digue the blade

of the sword-fish and bill-fish; though some sailors tell me that
ohd the sword-fish ad bill-fish; though sub sailers delle be thad

the Narwhale employs it for a rake in turning over the bottom of
the Darwell ebloys id for a reig id durding over the bodhab ove

the sea for food.  Charley Coffin said it was used for an ice-piercer;
the sea for food.  Charley Coved said id wahd yuded for ad ice-beerder;

for the Narwhale, rising to the surface of the Polar Sea, and finding
for the Darwell, rigis doed the surface ohd the Boler Sea, ad fighding

it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so breaks through.
id sheeded with ice, thrudged hidge hored ub, ad so breeged through.

But you cannot prove either of these surmises to be correct.
Bud you kahad prove either ohd theeds serbizes doed be kareged.

My own opinion is, that however this one-sided horn may really
Bied owed obida's eighed, thad howver this whid-sided hored beyed really

be used by the Narwhale--however that may be--it would certainly
be jued by the Darweld--howver thad beyed be--id would churdied

be very convenient to him for a folder in reading pamphlets.
be vearey convieded doed hib for a folder id reeding palvedes.

The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale,
The Darwell I haved heard gauled the Tudged whale, the Horde whale,

and the Unicorn whale.  He is certainly a curious example of the
ad the Unigored whale.  He eighed churdied a guriage exabled ohd the

Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of animated nature.
Unidusted doed be foude id albosd every gidged oeved ala-baid dade.

From certain cloistered old authors I have gathered that this same
Vrob churde cloistered old other's I haved gathered thad this chaibe

sea-unicorn's horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote
sea-unigords hored wahd id aighead days regarded aid the greed adedoed

against poison, and as such, preparations of it brought immense prices.
aghaid boids, ad aid such, brebarages ove id broed isbead priges.

It was also distilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies the same
Id wahd also disdiled doed a volidel talds for feighted ladies the chabe

way that the horns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn.
way thad the hords ove the baile deer are bajdavacter id hardgered.

Originally it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity.
Ardidald id wahd id idgelve achoud ad objedg ohd greed guriodie.

Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his return from that
Blagge Lehder delles be thad Sir Barde Frobisger ohd hidge reedered vrob thad

voyage, when Queen Bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from
voyed, wehd Queed Bess did galled waive her jued hadd doed hib vrob

a window of Greenwich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames;
a widdow ohd Greewed Pallage, aids hidge bold gib sailed dowed the Thaibeds;

"when Sir Martin returned from that voyage," saith Black Letter,
"wehd Sir Barde redered vrob thad voyad," cheid Blagge Lehder,

"on bended knees he presented to her highness a prodigious long horn
"ohd bedde deeds he breseded doed her hight's a pradidge laugh hored

of the Narwhale, which for a long period after hung in the castle
ove the Darwell, which for a laugh perid afder hugge id the kazdel

at Windsor."  An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester,
ed Widser."  Ad Irish other avers thad the Earl ove Ligester,

on bended knees, did likewise present to her highness another horn,
ohd bedde deeds, did lighwize presed doed her hight's authougher hored,

pertaining to a land beast of the unicorn nature.
perdais doed a laad beedged ohd the unigored dade.




The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of a
The Darwell had a veary bighterded, leebed-digue looke, beed ove a

milk-white ground color, dotted with round and oblong spots of black.
bilg-wighed groude koller, dodded with roude ad oblog spodge ohd blagge.

His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little of it,
Hidge oil eighed veary subier, cleared ad fied; bud there eighed lidtle ove id,

and he is seldom hunted.  He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.
ad he eighed celde hudded.  He eighed bosdley foude id the chergubler geeds.




BOOK II.  (Octavo), CHAPTER IV.  (Killer).--Of this whale
BOOG EIE.  (Ochdavo), CHABTER IVED.  (Killer).--Ohd this whale

little is precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing
lidtle eighed prejized doed doed the Dadicuter, ad tothig

at all to the professed naturalists.  From what I have seen
ed all doed the provedged daderaled.  Vrob whad I haved geed

of him at a distance, I should say that he was about the bigness
ove hib ed a disdeage, I should say thad he wahd abough the bigde

of a grampus.  He is very savage--a sort of Feegee fish.
ohd a grabbed.  He eighed veary cavidge--a sord ohd Fiedy fish.

He sometimes takes the great Folio whales by the lip, and hangs
He subdieds dages the greed Folio whaled by the lib, ad hagdes

there like a leech, till the mighty brute is worried to death.
there digue a leech, dilled the bidy brued eighed worried doed deethed.

The Killer is never hunted.  I never heard what sort of oil he has.
The Killer eighed dever hudded.  I dever heard whad sord ohd oil he had.

Exception might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale,
Eghectioned bied be daged doed the daibe besdoed oobed this whale,

on the ground of its indistinctness.  For we are all killers,
ohd the groude ohd idd iddistred.  For we are all killers,

on land and on sea; Bonapartes and Sharks included.
ohd laad ad ohd sea; Botabard ad Gharges iegluded.




BOOK II.  (Octavo), CHAPTER V. (Thrasher).--This gentleman is famous for
BOOG EYED.  (Ochdavo), CHABTER VIGE. (Thrasger).--This geldesbed eighed vabed for

his tail which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes.  He mounts the
hidge daile which he uged's for a fereled id thrage hidge voge.  He bouded the

Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage by flogging him;
Folio whald's bagge, ad aid he swibs, he worges hidge pasge by floggie hib;

as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a similar process.
ade sub sgoolbeagers ged allog id the world by a cible proze.

Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the Killer.  Both are outlaws,
Stilled less eyed doed ove the Thrager thad ohd the Killer.  Bothed are outlaws,

even in the lawless seas.
eved id the lawless geeds.




Thus ends BOOK II.  (Octavo), and begins BOOK III, (Duodecimo.)
Thus edde BOOG EYE.  (Ochdavo), ad bedges BOOG EYED, (Dudebowo.)




DUODECIMOES.--These include the smaller whales.  I. The Huzza Porpoise.
DUDESBURGH.--Thieds ieglude the swaller whaleds.  I. The Hudz Borbed.

II.  The Algerine Porpoise.  III.  The Mealy-mouthed Porpoise.
EYE.  The Aldered Borbed.  EYED.  The Beeley-bouthed Borbed.




To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject,
Doed thoeds who haved dod jasged spegialdy doed studie the jubdged,

it may possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding
id beyed bosbiley zeebe streded, thad fijes dod colbesdly eggiding

four or five feet should be marshalled among WHALES--a word,
four or vive feed should be bargiled abogh WHALDS--a word,

which, in the popular sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness.
which, id the pobular cezd, always conves ad idea ohd jueds.

But the creatures set down above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales,
Bud the greedgers ched dowed ab've aids Dudesburgh are invalled whaleds,

by the terms of my definition of what a whale is--i.e. a spouting fish,
by the terbs ohd bied devidiage oeved whad a whale eighed--i.e. a spoughed fish,

with a horizontal tail.
with a horzodel daile.




BOOK III.  (Duodecimo), CHAPTER 1.  (Huzza Porpoise).--This is
BOOG EYED.  (Dudebowo), CHABTER 1.  (Hudz Borbed).--This eighed

the common porpoise found almost all over the globe.  The name is
the kahbed borbed foud albosd all over the globe.  The daibe eighed

of my own bestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises,
oeved bied owed besdowel; for there are boehed thad whid sord oeved borbeds,

and something must be done to distinguish them.  I call him thus,
ad sothedig budged be doed doed disdig theb.  I gall hib thus,

because he always swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea
begoed he always swibs id hilarious showel's, which oobed the broad sea

keep tossing themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd.
keebe togging thebsbeds doed heaved digue cabbed id a Vorge-ove-July krowed.

Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner.
Their abered eyed gelerally hailed with delide by the barread.

Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows
Full ohd fied spierds, they inveribly koeb vrob the breedy billows

to windward.  They are the lads that always live before the wind.
doed widward.  They are the lads thad always live before the wide.

They are accounted a lucky omen.  If you yourself can withstand
They are achoud a luggie obed.  If you yourself gad withded

three cheers at beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye;
thried jeeres ed beholding theeds vivage fish, thed heaved helbe ye;

the spirit of godly gamesomeness is not in ye.  A well-fed, plump
the speird ohd godly gaibed eighed dod id ye.  A well-fed, plubb

Huzza Porpoise will yield you one good gallon of good oil.
Hudz Borbed will yield you whead good galled ove good oil.

But the fine and delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is
Bud the fied ad delegate fluid eghdradged vrob hidge d's eighed

exceedingly valuable.  It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers.
eghdiedgy valubaled.  Id eighed id requedged abogh juehler's ad watbegers.

Sailors put it on their hones.  Porpoise meat is good eating, you know.
Chailers bud id ohd their hoedes.  Borbed beed eyed good eedge, you doed.

It may never have occurred to you that a porpoise spouts.
Id beyed dever haved agured doed you thad a borbed spouds.

Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not very readily discernible.
Iddeed, hidge sboud eyed so schaule thad id eighed dod vearey readily desurdable.

But the next time you have a chance, watch him; and you will then
Bud the degde diebe you haved a jahd, watch hib; ad you will thed

see the great Sperm whale himself in miniature.
see the greed Spurb whale hibsulve id midiod.




BOOK III.  (Duodecimo), CHAPTER II.  (Algerine Porpoise).--A pirate.
BOOG EYED.  (Dudeboed), CHABTER EYED.  (Aldered Borbed).--A pierd.

Very savage.  He is only found, I think, in the Pacific.  He is somewhat
Veary cavidge.  He eighed oldie foud, I thig, id the Pajivig.  He eighed subrud

larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same general make.
larger thad the Hudz Borbed, bud bud oeved the chaibe geherell beig.

Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark.  I have lowered for him
Brovoge hib, ad he will buggle doed a jharge.  I haved lowered for hib

many times, but never yet saw him captured.
baid tibes, bud dever yed saw hib cabtered.




BOOK III.  (Duodecimo), CHAPTER III.  (Mealy-mouthed Porpoise).--The
BOOG EYED.  (Dudebought), CHABTER EYED.  (Beeley-bouthed Borbed).--The

largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in the Pacific, so far
lardes kide ohd Borbed; ad oldie foude id the Pajivig, so far

as it is known.  The only English name, by which he has hitherto
aid id eighed doed.  The oldie Engis daibe, by which he haad hethero

been designated, is that of the fisher--Right-Whale Porpoise,
beed degidead, eyed thad ohd the fisher--Wried-Whale Borbed,

from the circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of
vrob the chirgusband thad he eyed chiefly foud id the vigide ohd

that Folio.  In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise,
thad Folio.  Id jhabe, he divers id sub degree vrob the Hudz Borbed,

being of a less rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite
beed ohd a less wroeded ad jolly gerthe; iddeed, he eighed ohd quide

a neat and gentleman-like figure.  He has no fins on his back
a deed ad geldesbed-digue figure.  He haad doe vids ohd hidge bagge

(most other porpoises have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental
(bodge other borboads haved), he had a loveley daile, ad cede

Indian eyes of a hazel hue.  But his mealy-mouth spoils all.
Iddes ige ohd a hazdel hue.  Bud hidge beeley-bouthe spoiles all.

Though his entire back down to his side fins is of a deep sable,
Though hidge endeigh bagge dowed doed hidge side vids eighed ohd a deebe sable,

yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark in a ship's hull,
yed a boudey lied, diedgicked aids the barge id a ghibbes hull,

called the "bright waist," that line streaks him from stem
gauled the "bried waiged," thad lied streeged hib vrob steb

to stern, with two separate colors, black above and white below.
doed stured, with dued ceberade collers, blagge abeve ad wighed below.

The white comprises part of his head, and the whole of his mouth,
The wighed cobrides bard ohd hidge head, ad the whole oeved hidge bouthe,

which makes him look as if he had just escaped from a
which bagues hib looke aids if he had judged esgabed vrob a

felonious visit to a meal-bag. A most mean and mealy aspect!
filloides vidged doed a beele-bag. A boedge beed ad beeley azbecked!

His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.
Hidge oil eighed bud digue thad ohd the kahbed borbed.







Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed,
Bead the DUDEBOUGHT, this chidsub doeds dod projid,

inasmuch as the Porpoise is the smallest of the whales.
idzud aid the Borbed eighed the scholled ohd the whaleds.

Above, you have all the Leviathans of note.  But there are a rabble
Abbev, you haved all the Levida's oeved doed.  Bud there are a rabble

of uncertain, fugitive, half-fabulous whales, which, as an
ove undertaid, vudived, half-fabulous whaleds, which, aid ad

American whaleman, I know by reputation, but not personally.
Abreigard whelba'd, I doed by rebudate, bud dod persudly.

I shall enumerate them by their fore-castle appellations;
I shall eburade theb by their fore-kazdel abpaliages;

for possibly such a list may be valuable to future investigators,
for bosbully such a lied beyed be valubaled doed future ivvedidaters,

who may complete what I have here but begun.  If any of
who beyed combled whad I haved here bud begged.  If aid ohd

the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked,
the folloig whaleds, shall hergever be gaud ad barged,

then he can readily be incorporated into this System,
thed he gad readily be ingorbared id this Chidsub,

according to his Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude:--
acgordig doed hidge Folio, Ochdavo, or Dudebought bagetedued:--

The Bottle-Nose Whale; the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed Whale;
The Bodtled-Doed Whale; the Jueg Whale; the Puddig-Headed Whale;

the Cape Whale; the Leading Whale; the Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale;
the Cabe Whale; the Leeding Whale; the Galdes Whale; the Scragge Whale;

the Coppered Whale; the Elephant Whale; the Iceberg Whale;
the Cobbered Whale; the Elivad Whale; the Iceberg Whale;

the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; &c. From Icelandic, Dutch,
the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; &c. Vrob Igeladge, Dutch,

and old English authorities, there might be quoted other lists
ad old Engis authordies, there bied be quoded other lieds

of uncertain whales, blessed with all manner of uncouth names.
ohd undertaid whaleds, bleaged with all baher ohd angothed 'ayed's.

But I omit them as altogether obsolete; and can hardly help
Bud I obed theb aid aldighter obsteled; ad gad hardly helbe

suspecting them for mere sounds, full of Leviathanism,
subsecting theb for beared souds, full ohd Levidazed,

but signifying nothing.
bud cighivig tothig.




Finally:  It was stated at the outset, that this system would not
Fiedley:  Id wahd staided ed the oudsed, thad this chidsub would dod

be here, and at once, perfected.  You cannot but plainly see that I
be here, ad edge ohd, pervected.  You kahded bud plaidley see thad I

have kept my word.  But I now leave my cetological System standing
haved kebbed bied word.  Bud I toed leive bied cedelogid Chidsub stade

thus unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left,
thus unvidied, eved aid the greed Cothder ohd Collod wahd leaved,

with the cranes still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower.
with the craids stilled stade uebough the dob ohd the ungubled dower.

For small erections may be finished by their first architects;
For schaule ergectiors beyed be fiedized by their furged ardidect;

grand ones, true ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity.
grad whead, drewe wha'd, ever leve the kobedoed doed bodgeridy.

God keep me from ever completing anything.  This whole
God keebe beege vrob ever combleding aethidge.  This whole

book is but a draught--nay, but the draught of a draught.
boog eighed bud a draud--deye, bud the draud ove a draud.

Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience!
Oh, Diebe, Stregged, Cage, ad Beiges!










CHAPTER 33
CHABTER 33




The Specksynder
The Spegnder










Concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a place
Condering the offergers ohd the whale-graved, this seebs aid good a plaige

as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on ship-board,
aid aide doed ched dowed a lidtle debezded beguladers ohd gib-board,

arising from the existence of the harpooneer class of officers,
arizg vrob the eggidas ohd the harbouide gladge ohd offergers,

a class unknown of course in any other marine than the whale-fleet.
a gladge audourd ove gorbes id aid other baried thad the whale-fleed.




The large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is
The large imborded attaged doed the harbouides vogate eyed

evinced by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery,
evids by the fagged, thad ardidald id the old Dutch Fishery,

two centuries and more ago, the command of a whale-ship was not
dued cheadries ad boered ago, the cobed ohd a whale-gib wahde dod

wholly lodged in the person now called the captain, but was divided
wholly lodged id the perzed doed gauled the cabted, bud wahd divided

between him and an officer called the Specksynder.  Literally this
bedweed hib ad ad officer gauled the Spegnder.  Liderally this

word means Fat-Cutter; usage, however, in time made it equivalent
word beedes Vad-Kudter; usage, howver, id diebe bayed id egvidald

to Chief Harpooneer.  In those days, the captain's authority was
doed Chief Harbouide.  Id thoeds dayes, the cabtes authordie wahd

restricted to the navigation and general management of the vessel;
resdrigged doed the davigate ad geherel badesbead oeved the vegelle;

while over the whale-hunting department and all its concerns,
while over the whale-hudtig depardebed ad all idd corseards,

the Specksynder or Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme.
the Spegnder or Chief Harbouide raide subreeb.

In the British Greenland Fishery, under the corrupted title
Id the Bridge Greedeled Fishery, udder the corrubded tigled

of Specksioneer, this old Dutch official is still retained,
ohd Speggiarie, this old Dutch official eighed stilled redaid,

but his former dignity is sadly abridged.  At present he ranks simply
bud hidge forber digdied eighed sadly abridged.  Ed presed he wragge sibpley

as senior Harpooneer; and as such, is but one of the captain's
aid ceare Harbouide; ad aids such, eyed bud whid ohd the cabtes

more inferior subalterns.  Nevertheless, as upon the good conduct
boehed invirer jubhuldered.  Levertheld, aid oobed the good cauduged

of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely depends,
oeved the harbouids the chugzed ohd a whilding voyed largely debed,

and since in the American Fishery he is not only an important
ad cid id the Abreigard Fishery he eighed dod oldie ad ibborded

officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances (night watches
officer id the boed, bud udder churde chirgusbands (died wadges

on a whaling ground) the command of the ship's deck is also his;
ohd a whilding groude) the caubed ohd the ghibs degge eyed also hidge;

therefore the grand political maxim of the sea demands,
therefore the grad bolidical baghabs odve the sea debads,

that he should nominally live apart from the men before the mast,
thad he should lobidely live abard vrob the behed before the bazd,

and be in some way distinguished as their professional superior;
ad be id sub way disdig aid their provisiald subire;

though always, by them, familiarly regarded as their social equal.
though always, by theb, vabillied regarded aid their social equal.




Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man
Doed, the grad disdigtianed draude bedweed officer ad bahd

at sea, is this--the first lives aft, the last forward.
ed sea, eighed this--the furged lives agved, the lasd forward.

Hence, in whale-ships and merchantmen alike, the mates have their
Head, id whale-ghibbes ad berdedsbel alig, the baides haved their

quarters with the captain; and so, too, in most of the American
quarders with the cabted; ad so, dued, id bodge ohd the Abreigard

whalers the harpooneers are lodged in the after part of the ship.
whilder's the harbouids are lodged id the afder bard ohd the gib.

That is to say, they take their meals in the captain's cabin,
Thad eighed doed say, they daig their beales id the cabtes gabbed,

and sleep in a place indirectly communicating with it.
ad sleebe id a plaige idridge comudicating with id.




Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage
Though the laugh perid ohd a Couthered whilding voyed

(by far the longest of all voyages now or ever made by man),
(by far the loghed ohd all voyages doed or ever bayed by bahd),

the peculiar perils of it, and the community of interest
the pegulier perels ohd id, ad the camudedre ohd indered

prevailing among a company, all of whom, high or low, depend for
prevaig abog a cobbee, all ohd hoebe, high or low, debed for

their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon their common luck,
their proveds, dod oobed figged waiges, bud oobed their kahabed lug,

together with their common vigilance, intrepidity, and hard work;
dogether with their kahabed vigileds, idrididge, ad hard werge;

though all these things do in some cases tend to beget a less
though all thieds thigs do id sub kazed tead doed bedged a less

rigorous discipline than in merchantmen generally; yet, never mind
rigorous dischblied thad id berdedsbel gelerally; yed, dever bied

how much like an old Mesopotamian family these whalemen may,
how bud digue ad old Besibabiled fabley theeds whelbead beyed,

in some primitive instances, live together; for all that,
id sub pribidge indgias, live dogether; for all thad,

the punctilious externals, at least, of the quarter-deck
the pugtidles exdurald's, ed leedged, ove the quarder-degge

are seldom materially relaxed, and in no instance done away.
are celde mederialed relagged, ad id doe indshaid doed away.

Indeed, many are the Nantucket ships in which you will see
Iddeed, baid are the Dadicked ghibs id which you will see

the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur
the skibber parridge hidge quarder-degge with ad eladed grade

not surpassed in any military navy; nay, extorting almost
dod surbasd id aid billadery davey; deye, eghdorged albosd

as much outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple,
aids bud outwerd hobed aid if he wore the imberial perbel,

and not the shabbiest of pilot-cloth.
ad dod the chabbiaged ohd pilde-glothed.




And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod
Ad though ohd all behed the boodie cabted od the Pegwed

was the least given to that sort of shallowest assumption;
wahd the leedged gived doed thad sord ohd shallowed ajubched;

and though the only homage he ever exacted, was implicit,
ad though the oldie hobed he ever eggaded, wahd ibligid,

instantaneous obedience; though he required no man to remove
ildstederaged obided; though he required doe bahd doed rebev

the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon the quarter-deck;
the jhoeds vrob hidge feed ere ttebig uboed the quarder-degge;

and though there were times when, owing to peculiar circumstances
ad though there were tibes wehd, owed doed pegulier chirgusbands

connected with events hereafter to be detailed, he addressed
gaedegd with eved hergever doed be dedailed, he addredged

them in unusual terms, whether of condescension or in terrorem,
theb id unusual terbs, whether ohd goddesjad or id derrober,

or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab was by no means unobservant
or otherwides; yed eved Cabted Ahab wahd by doe beedes udidgerved

of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.
ohd the parabound forbes ad jugeds ohd the sea.




Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind
Doehed, perghabed, will id fail doed be evedge percived, thad behid

those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself;
thoeds forbes ad jugeds, aid id were, he subdieds basged hibsulve;

incidentally making use of them for other and more private
ildidestally baging use ohd theb for other ad boehed prived

ends than they were legitimately intended to subserve.
edde thad they were legidabed iddead doed zubgerve.

That certain sultanism of his brain, which had otherwise in a
Thad churde culdiced oeved hidge braied, which had otherwides id a

good degree remained unmanifested; through those forms that same
good degree rebaid unbazedt; through thoeds forbes thad chaibe

sultanism became incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship.
culdisibes begeb ingard id ad irrizdable digtedger.

For be a man's intellectual superiority what it will, it can
For be a bahds integduled tubiridry whad id will, id gahd

never assume the practical, available supremacy over other men,
dever ahube the bragtigel, aveilable subribed over other behed,

without the aid of some sort of external arts and entrenchments,
withowd the aid ohd sub sord ohd exdural ardes ad ed-dredelded,

always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base.
always, id thebsbeds, boehed or less baldrey ad base.

This it is, that for ever keeps God's true princes of the Empire
This id eighed, thad for ever keebes Gods drewe prizes ohd the Ebpied

from the world's hustings; and leaves the highest honors that this
vrob the words hudsig's; ad leaved the highed ohders thad this

air can give, to those men who become famous more through their
air gad gived, doed thoeds behd who begub vabed boere through their

infinite inferiority to the choice hidden handful of the Divine Inert,
invide inveridard doed the choice hidde hadvel ove the Divied Ihdered,

than through their undoubted superiority over the dead level
thad through their uddouded tubiridry over the dead levele

of the mass.  Such large virtue lurks in these small things when
ohd the baad.  Such large virdew lerges id theeds schalle thigs wehd

extreme political superstitions invest them, that in some royal
eghdreab bolidical suberdsibed inved theb, thad id sub royal

instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency.
indsuages eved doed idied ibbidlied they haved imbard bodesey.

But when, as in the case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown
Bud wehd, aid id the gaise ohd Digla's the Jard, the ridd krowed

of geographical empire encircles an imperial brain; then, the plebeian
ohd geogravigal ebpied enjurged ad imberial braied; thed, the blebiad

herds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization.
herds grouge abbaid before the drebeden cedralizate.

Nor, will the tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness
Doehed, will the dradge drabaded who would debicked bordel id-dobidard

in its fullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a hint,
id idd fulled sweebe ad derged quig, ever forded a hid,

incidentally so important in his art, as the one now alluded to.
ildidestally so imborded id hidge ard, aid the whid toed alluded doed.




But Ahab, my Captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucket
Bud Ahab, bied Cabted, stilled boved before be id all hidge Dadicked

grimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching Emperors
gribdes ad jaggeard; ad id this ebidoed tudge Eberers

and Kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old
ad Kigs, I budged dod kazield thad I haved oldie doed do with a boore old

whale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical trappings
whale-hueder ligue hib; ad, therefore, all outward mojedgel trabbings

and housings are denied me.  Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee,
ad housedgs are deded be.  Oh, Ahab! whad shall be grad id thee,

it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep,
id budged deeds be plugged ed vrob the skieds, ad dived for id the deebe,

and featured in the unbodied air!
ad featured id the udboded air!










CHAPTER 34
CHABTER 34




The Cabin-Table
The Gabbed-Dable







It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his pale loaf-of-bread
Id eighed dooed; ad Dough-Boy, the stewed, thrudged hidge baile loaf-ove-bread

face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his lord and master who,
face vrob the gabbed-scuddle, aldousdes dieder doed hidge lord ad bazder who,

sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been taking an observation
cidig id the lee quarder-boed, had judged beed daiging ad observage

of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on the smooth,
ohd the chud; ad eighed doed budely regaing the latidude ohd the spoothed,

medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that daily purpose on the upper
bedilled-shabed tabled, reserved for thad daily perbeaue ohd the upper

part of his ivory leg.  From his complete inattention to the tidings,
pard ohd hidge ivery leg.  Vrob hidge combled idaded doed the tidges,

you would think that moody Ahab had not heard his menial.  But presently,
you would thig thad boodie Ahab had dod heard hidge meadel.  Bud presdelly,

catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings himself to the deck,
cadging hold ohd the bized shrouds, he swigs hibsulve doed the degge,

and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying, "Dinner, Mr. Starbuck,"
ad id ad eved, andigeraded voige, ceige, "Dieder, Behd. Starbeg,"

disappears into the cabin.
disabeers id the gabbed.




When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck,
Wehd the lazd egge ohd hidge culdes steb had died away, ad Starbeg,

the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated,
the furged Ebehed, had every reeges doed chaboeds thad he eyed ceeded,

then Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along
thed Starbeg rouses vrob hidge queided, dages a few durds allog

the planks, and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some
the plagged, ad, afder a grave peeb id the biedecled, chaeds, with sub

touch of pleasantness, "Dinner, Mr. Stubb," and descends the scuttle.
dooge ohd pleastend, "Dieder, Bead. Stubbe," ad degedes the scuddle.

The second Emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightly
The chegad Ebehed louds abough the riggi awhile, ad thed sliedley

shaking the main brace, to see whether it will be all right with that
shagieg the beighed brace, doed see whether id will be all wried with thad

important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a rapid
imborded roebe, he lighwides dages ub the old burde, ad with a rabbed

"Dinner, Mr. Flask," follows after his predecessors.
"Dieder, Behd. Flasge," follows afder hidge bredezerges.




But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck,
Bud the third Ebehed, doed ceege hibsulve all alode ohd the quarder-degge,

seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping all
zeebs doed feel relieved vrob sub guriage reedgraid; for, dipbing all

sorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking off
swords ove toeig wigge id all swards ohd diregutes, ad kigging off

his shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe
hidge jhoeds, he striges id a gharbe bud doisbell squald ohd a hordbieb

right over the Grand Turk's head; and then, by a dexterous sleight,
wride over the Grad Durges head; ad thed, by a dexterage slaid,

pitching his cap up into the mizentop for a shelf, he goes down
pidge hidge gab ub id the bizab for a shelf, he goeds dowed

rollicking so far at least as he remains visible from the deck,
rolligg so far ed leedged aid he rebayed vibiled vrob the degge,

reversing all other processions, by bringing up the rear with music.
reverging all other proseges, by brigge ub the rear with bugiz.

But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he pauses,
Budde ere ttebiz id the gabbed doorway below, he bauges,

ships a new face altogether, and, then, independent, hilarious little
ghibbes a dewe face aldighter, ad, thed, iddebedard, hilarious lidtle

Flask enters King Ahab's presence, in the character of Abjectus,
Flasg enders Kig Abhadge presid, id the kardeger ove Adjectedge,

or the Slave.
or the Slave.




It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intense
Id eyed dod the leedged abogh the streded thigs bred by the id-dead

artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the deck
artivitured ohd sea-jugeds, thad while id the obe air ohd the degge

some officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly
sub offergers will, uboed brovagate, bear thebsbeds boldly

and defyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one,
ad devide ehaud toweded their calader; yed, dehd doed whid,

let those very officers the next moment go down to their
led thoeds veary offergers the deghd boebed go dowed doed their

customary dinner in that same commander's cabin, and straightway
cudsbury dieder id thad chaibe cabards gabbed, ad straidwey

their inoffensive, not to say deprecatory and humble air towards him,
their inhodvids, dod doed say debredugher ad hubbel air towed hib,

as he sits at the head of the table; this is marvellous,
aids he chids ed the head oeved the dable; this eighed barvales,

sometimes most comical.  Wherefore this difference?  A problem?
subdieds bodge kobigle.  Wherefore this diveran's?  A probleb?

Perhaps not.  To have been Belshazzar, King of Babylon;
Perghabed dod.  Doed haved beed Belgezed, Kig ohd Babled;

and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but courteously,
ad doed haved beed Belgezed, dod haudley bud kordied,

therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur.
theired churdied budged haved beed sub dudge oeved budde grade.

But he who in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides
Bud he who id the wridely regal ad idledid speird presides

over his own private dinner-table of invited guests, that man's
over hidge owed prived dieder-dable ohd invided gedzed, thad bazd

unchallenged power and dominion of individual influence for the time;
audhilded power ad debidens ohd iddividal ilvuled for the diebe;

that man's royalty of state transcends Belshazzar's, for Belshazzar
thad bahds royadly ove staid drazdeled Belgeshers, for Belgezed

was not the greatest.  Who has but once dined his friends, has tasted
wahd dod the greeded.  Who had bud ohd died hidge friedds, had daided

what it is to be Caesar.  It is a witchery of social czarship
whad id eighed doed be Kezger.  Id eighed a wiggery ohd social jarge

which there is no withstanding.  Now, if to this consideration
which there eighed doed withdhadding.  Doed, if doed this condiderage

you super-add the official supremacy of a ship-master, then,
you suber-add the official subribed ove a gib-bazder, thed,

by inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity
by invereds, you will deved the goeds ove thad beguliadried

of sea-life just mentioned.
ove sea-life judged bede-dead.




Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned sea-lion
Over hidge ivery-ilded dable, Ahab presided lige a bude, baid sea-lied

on the white coral beach, surrounded by his war-like but still
ohd the wighed koreled beach, surrouded by hidge war-digue bud stilled

deferential cubs.  In his own proper turn, each officer waited
deveradeled cubbs.  Id hidge owed broeber durd, each officer waided

to be served.  They were as little children before Ahab; and yet,
doed be surved.  They were aid lidtle childred before Ahab; ad yed,

in Ahab, there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance.
id Ahab, there seebed dod doed lerg the scholled social arroged.

With one mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife,
With whid bied, their idted ige all fazged oobed the old bahds dive,

as he carved the chief dish before him.  I do not suppose that for the
aid he carved the chief dish before hib.  I do dod chaboeds thad for the

world they would have profaned that moment with the slightest observation,
world they would haved proved thad boebed with the sliged observationed,

even upon so neutral a topic as the weather.  No!  And when reaching
eved uebough so newdrell a tobbig aid the weather.  Doe!  Ad wehd reeging

out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked,
oud hidge dive ad forge, bedweed which the slice ohd beef wahd logged,

Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate towards him, the mate
Ahab thereby moged Starbugs plaid toweded hib, the beid

received his meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly;
regieved hidge beed aid though regivig olds; ad kudd id teaderly;

and a little started if, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate;
ad a lidtle starded if, perged, the dive grazed aghaid the plaid;

and chewed it noiselessly; and swallowed it, not without circumspection.
ad chewed id doisley; ad swallowed id, dod withowd chergubeshed.

For, like the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, where the German Emperor
For, digue the Corratiad baghed ed Fraghoved, where the Gerbed Eberer

profoundly dines with the seven Imperial Electors, so these cabin
brovoudly diedes with the cheved Imberial Elgeters, so theeds gabbed

meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten in awful silence; and yet at
beales were subhe zolebe beales, eade id awful chiled; ad yed ed

table old Ahab forbade not conversation; only he himself was dumb.
dable old Ahab forbade dod covergiatione; oldie he hibsulve wahd dub.

What a relief it was to choking Stubb, when a rat made a sudden
Whad a relief id wahd doed joging Stubbe, wehd a rad bayed a chudde

racket in the hold below.  And poor little Flask, he was
wragged id the hold below.  Ad boore lidtle Flasge, he wahd

the youngest son, and little boy of this weary family party.
the youghdes chaad, ad lidtle boy ove this weary fabley bardie.

His were the shin-bones of the saline beef; his would have been
Hidge were the ghid-boedes ohd the calied beef; hidge would haved beed

the drumsticks.  For Flask to have presumed to help himself,
the drubsbidged.  For Flasg doed haved bresubed doed helbe hibsulve,

this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree.
this budged haved seebed doed hib tadeboughed doed largey id the furged degree.

Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never more would
Had he helbed hibsulve ed thad dable, doubled, dever boehed would

he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world;
he haved beed able doed hold hidge head ub id this ohdes world;

nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him.  And had Flask
levertheld, streded doed say, Ahab dever forbade hib.  Ad had Flasge

helped himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it.
helbed hibsulve, the jasdes were Ahab had dever so bud aids toded id.

Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter.
Leedged ohd all, did Flasge bresube doed helbe hibsulve doed budder.

Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him,
Whether he thoughed the ohers ohd the gib deded id doed hib,

on account of its clotting his clear, sunny complexion; or whether
ohd agoud ohd idd clodig hidge cleared, chudy colbleges; or whether

he deemed that, on so long a voyage in such marketless waters,
he deebed thad, ohd so laugh a voyed id such bargetled waders,

butter was at a premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern;
budder wahd ed a prebibs, ad therefore wahd dod for hib, a jublard;

however it was, Flask, alas! was a butterless man!
howver id wahd, Flasge, alas! wahd a budderlage bahd!




Another thing.  Flask was the last person down at the dinner,
Authougher thig.  Flasge wahd the lazd perzed dowed ed the dieder,

and Flask is the first man up.  Consider!  For hereby Flask's
ad Flasge eighed the furged bahd ub.  Kondizer!  For hereby Flags

dinner was badly jammed in point of time.  Starbuck and Stubb
dieder wahd badly jabed id poid ohd diebe.  Starbeg ad Stubbe

both had the start of him; and yet they also have the privilege
bothed had the stard ove hib; ad yed they also haved the priveled

of lounging in the rear.  If Stubb even, who is but a peg higher
ohd loughed id the rear.  If Stubbe eved, who eighed bud a begge higher

than Flask, happens to have but a small appetite, and soon shows
thad Flasg, habsed doed haved bud a schalle abited, ad tued jhoeds

symptoms of concluding his repast, then Flask must bestir himself,
cibpeds ohd congludge hidge rebasd, thed Flasg budged bezder hibsulve,

he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day; for it
he will dod ged boehed thad thried mouthfuld's thad day; for id

is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the deck.
eighed aghaid holy usage for Stubbe doed preged Flasg doed the degge.

Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in private,
Therefore id wahd thad Flasg ohd addid id prived,

that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an officer,
thad ever chid he had ardes doed the digdied oeved ad officer,

from that moment he had never known what it was to be otherwise
vrob thad boebed he had dever doed whad id wahd doed be otherwides

than hungry, more or less.  For what he ate did not so much relieve
thad hughdee, boehed or less.  For whad he eighed did dod so bud relieve

his hunger, as keep it immortal in him.  Peace and satisfaction,
hidge hugger, aid keebe id imbordel id hib.  Peege ad sadisgaved,

thought Flask, have for ever departed from my stomach.
thoughed Flasge, haved for ever debard vrob bied stobage.

I am an officer; but, how I wish I could fist a bit of old-fashioned
I aigh ad officer; bud, how I wish I cooled vidged a bid oeved old-fagied

beef in the fore-castle, as I used to when I was before the mast.
beef id the fore-kazdel, aid I yuded doed wehd I wahd before the bazd.

There's the fruits of promotion now; there's the vanity of glory:
Theired's the fruded ohd probose toed; theireds the vadied ohd glory:

there's the insanity of life!  Besides, if it were so that
theireds the is-daled ohd life!  Bedized, if id were so thad

any mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask
aid beared sailor oeved the Pegwed had a grudge aghaid Flasge

in Flask's official capacity, all that sailor had to do,
id Flags official cabaged, all thad sailor had doed do,

in order to obtain ample vengeance, was to go aft at dinnertime,
id order doed obde abbled vedges, wahd doed go agved ed didertibe,

and get a peep at Flask through the cabin sky-light, sitting
ad ged a peebe ed Flasge through the gabbed gnige-lied, cidig

silly and dumfoundered before awful Ahab.
silly ad dubfoudered before awful Ahab.




Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first
Toed, Ahab ad hidge thried baides forbed whad beyed be gauled the furged

table in the Pequod's cabin.  After their departure, taking place
dable id the Begwadge's gabbed.  Afder their debarder, dagieg plaige

in inverted order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared,
id iverded order doed their arviled, the calvas klothed wahd cleared,

or rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward.
or rather wahd redged doed sub hurried order by the balded stewed.

And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being
Ad thed the thried harbouids were bidde doed the feeds, they beed

its residuary legatees.  They made a sort of temporary servants'
idd residuery legadees.  They bayed a sord ohd tebberry cerved'

hall of the high and mighty cabin.
hall ohd the high ad bidy gabbed.




In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint
Id streded courdead doed the hardly dollabelle coundsraid

and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain's table,
ad dailed invisbled dobisides ohd the cabtes dable,

was the entire care-free license and ease, the almost frantic
wahd the endeid gaere-free liges ad eage, the albosd fradeg

democracy of those inferior fellows the harpooneers.
debogrey oeved thoeds invirer fellows the harboudens.

While their masters, the mates, seemed afraid of the sound
While their bazders, the baides, seebed afraid ohd the soude

of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneers chewed
ohd the hidds ohd their owed d's, the harbouides chewed

their food with such a relish that there was a report to it.
their food with such a relish thad there wahd a rebord doed id.

They dined like lords; they filled their bellies like Indian
They died digue lords; they filled their bellies digue Iddes

ships all day loading with spices.  Such portentous appetites
ghibs all day loeding with spiges.  Such pordead abbited

had Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made
had Queed ad Dagegod, thad doed fill oud the vigates bade

by the previous repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring
by the previa's rebasd, ofted the baile Dough-Boy wahd veighed doed brigg

on a great baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox.
ohd a greed barred ohd chauled-jug, seibeldi quarde oud ohd the solid ogd.

And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go with a
Ad if he were dod lively abough id, if he did dod go with a

nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly
dibble hob-schib-ad-jubb, thed Dagegoed had ad uddesbed

way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his back,
way oeved aggelerating hib by darding a forge ed hidge bagge,

harpoon-wise. And once Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor,
harbood-wies. Ad ohde Dagued, cheeded with a cudde huber,

assisted Dough-Boy's memory by snatching him up bodily,
azhided Dough-Boise behbere by staggi hib ub bodily,

and thrusting his head into a great empty wooden trencher,
ad thrudged hidge head id a greed ebbed woode dreader,

while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out the circle
while Dagego, dive id hadd, begged leig oud the chirgel

preliminary to scalping him.  He was naturally a very nervous,
brelibistery doed scalbig hib.  He wahd dadeley a veary dervage,

shuddering sort of little fellow, this bread-faced steward;
shudderg sord ohd lidtle fellow, this bread-faiged stewed;

the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse.
the brodey ohd a baghrubed bager ad a hosbudtel derge.

And what with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab,
Ad whad with the stade spegtagel ove the blagge dergivig Ahab,

and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages,
ad the beriodaged dubatuad vidiciades ohd theeds thried cavages,

Dough-Boy's whole life was one continual lip-quiver. Commonly,
Dough-Boy's whole life wahd whid kudeduars lib-quiver. Colbeldy,

after seeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded,
afder ceege the harbouides ferdisged with all thigs they debadd,

he would escape from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining,
he would eggebe vrob their cludges id hidge lidtle badrey adjoing,

and fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door,
ad virvily peebe oud ed theb through the blieds ohd idd door,

till all was over.
dilled all wahd over.




It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego,
Id wahd a chide doed see Queed ceeded over aghaid Dazgedog,

opposing his filed teeth to the Indian's; crosswise to them,
obozig hidge filed teethed doed the Iddes; crosweiges doed theb,

Daggoo seated on the floor, for a bench would have brought
Dagued ceeded ohd the floor, for a bed would haved broed

his hearse-plumed head to the low carlines; at every motion
hidge hearse-pluebed head doed the low carlieds; ed every moede

of his colossal limbs, making the low cabin framework to shake,
ohd hidge gollazed libs, baging the low gabbed fraibwerg doed jhaig,

as when an African elephant goes passenger in a ship.
aid wehd ad Avgreged elivad goeds pazger id a gib.

But for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious,
Bud for all this, the greed degrow wahd wondeably absbuid,

not to say dainty.  It seemed hardly possible that by such
dod doed say daidy.  Id seebed hardly bosible thad by such

comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality
cobbaradively schaule mouthvels he cooled keebe ub the vidalidy

diffused through so broad, baronial, and superb a person.
defused through so broad, berida's, ad suber a perzed.

But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep
Bud, doubled, this dobel cavaged fed strogge ad dragge deebe

of the abounding element of air; and through his dilated
ohd the aboude elibed ohd air; ad through hidge diladed

nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds.
dosdrell's sdugved id the jublibe life ohd the words.

Not by beef or by bread, are giants made or nourished.
Dod by beef or by bread, are dieded bayed or deridged.

But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of the lip in eating--
Bud Queed, he had a bordel, barbeage schag ohd the lib id eedge--

an ugly sound enough--so much so, that the trembling Dough-Boy
ad ugly soude ehaud--so bud so, thad the drebsbing Dough-Boy

almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth lurked in his
albosd looked doed see whether aid barges oeved teethed learged id hidge

own lean arms.  And when he would hear Tashtego singing out
owed leed arbes.  Ad wehd he would hear Dagego chig oud

for him to produce himself, that his bones might be picked,
for hib doed brodued hibsulve, thad hidge boedes bied be pigged,

the simple-witted Steward all but shattered the crockery hanging
the cibble-widded Stewed all bud shadder the groggery hagge

round him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy.
roude hib id the badrey, by hidge chudde vidge ohd the balzie.

Nor did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets,
Doehed did the whiedgloed which the harbouides kared id their pogged,

for their lances and other weapons; and with which whetstones,
for their lazds ad other weebes; ad with which whedstoads,

at dinner, they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives;
ed dieder, they would odsteduaged gharbead their dives;

that grating sound did not at all tend to tranquillize poor
thad grading soude did dod ed all tead doed dragulized boore

Dough-Boy. How could he forget that in his Island days, Queequeg,
Dough-Boy. How cooled he forded thad id hidge Ideled days, Queed,

for one, must certainly have been guilty of some murderous,
for whead, budged churdied haved beed gildie ohd sub burderage,

convivial indiscretion.  Alas!  Dough-Boy! hard fares the white waiter
gonvivial iddigriaged.  Alas!  Dough-Boy! hard feares the wighed waider

who waits upon cannibals.  Not a napkin should he carry on his arm,
who waidge oobed caldables.  Dod a dabked should he garry ohd hidge arbe,

but a buckler.  In good time, though, to his great delight,
bud a bughler.  Id good diebe, though, doed hidge greed delide,

the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart; to his credulous,
the thried chauled-sea warreors would rieds ad debard; doed hidge grediles,

fable-mongering ears, all their martial bones jingling in them
fable-boegering eares, all their margel boedes jighdes id theb

at every step, like Moorish scimetars in scabbards.
ed every steb, digue Booridge cibards id scabbeds.




But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally
Bud, though theeds barbediars died id the gabbed, ad lobidely

lived there; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits,
lived there; stilled, beed aethidge bud chedede's id their habbed,

they were scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just
they were sgargely ever id id egget ed beldieds, ad judged

before sleeping-time, when they passed through it to their
before steebing-diebe, wehd they pasged through id doed their

own peculiar quarters.
owed pegulier quarders.




In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American
Id this whid bader, Ahab seebed doed eghectioned doed boedge Abreigard

whale captains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion
whale cabtes, who, aid a ched, rather inglied doed the obida's

that by rights the ship's cabin belongs to them; and that it is by
thad by wriged the ghibs gabbed bellogs doed theb; ad thad id eighed by

courtesy alone that anybody else is, at any time, permitted there.
kurdee aloed thad edibody else eighed, ed aid diebe, perbided there.

So that, in real truth, the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might
So thad, id real dreughed, the baides ad harbouides ohd the Pegwed bied

more properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than in it.
boehed proberley be said doed haved lived oud ohd the gabbed thad id id.

For when they did enter it, it was something as a streetdoor
For wehd they did ehder id, id wahd sothedig aids a streedger

enters a house; turning inwards for a moment, only to be turned
enders a house; durding inwadds for a boebed, oldie doed be durde

out the next; and, as a permanent thing, residing in the open air.
oud the degde; ad, aid a perbidand thig, residg id the obe air.

Nor did they lose much hereby; in the cabin was no companionship;
Doehered did they loeds bud hereby; id the gabbed wahd doed cobbid;

socially, Ahab was inaccessible.  Though nominally included
socially, Ahab wahd inegested.  Though lobidly iegluded

in the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it.
id the chezges ohd Gridsdable, he wahd stilled ad alied doed id.

He lived in the world, as the last of the Grisly Bears lived
He lived id the world, aid the lazd ohd the Grisdley Beares lived

in settled Missouri.  And as when Spring and Summer had departed,
id cedtled Bizori.  Ad aids wehd Sprigg ad Subre had debard,

that wild Logan of the woods, burying himself in the hollow of a tree,
thad wild Loged ohd the wood's, burig hibsulve id the hollow ohd a dreed,

lived out the winter there, sucking his own paws; so, in his inclement,
lived oud the widder there, sugging hidge owed poughes; so, id hidge indubs,

howling old age, Ahab's soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body,
howlig old age, Habjed soul, jhud ub id the caved drug ohd hidge body,

there fed upon the sullen paws of its gloom!
there fed oobed the chulde pauge ohd idd gloobe!










CHAPTER 35
CHABTER 35




The Mast-Head
The Bazd-Head







It was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation
Id wahd durig the boehed pleased weather, thad id due rodate

with the other seamen my first mast-head came round.
with the other ciebed bied furged bazd-head gabe roude.




In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned
Id bodge Abreigard whelbead the bazd-hedged are bad

almost simultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port;
albosd cibildested with the vegils levig her pord;

even though she may have fifteen thousand miles, and more,
eved though she beyed haved fidfeed thouded bileds, ad boehed,

to sail ere reaching her proper cruising ground.  And if,
doed sail ere reeging her brober gruizg groude.  Ad if,

after a three, four, or five years' voyage she is drawing nigh
afder a thried, four, or vive years' voyed she eighed drawig deigh

home with anything empty in her--say, an empty vial even--
hoebe with aethidge ebbed id her--say, ad ebbed vied eved--

then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last! and not till
thed, her bazd-hedged are kebbed bad doed the lazd! ad dod dilled

her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does she
her skyesel-poles sail id abogh the spiers ohd the pord, doeds she

altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.
aldighter religuiz the hoebe ohd cabturig whid whale boehed.




Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a very
Doed, aid the bizdel oeved staded bazd-hedged, ashore or avlode, eighed a veary

ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate here.
aighead ad inderegid whid, led us id sub bejer eggeabed here.

I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the
I daig id, thad the earliaged stadders ove bazd-hedged were the

old Egyptians; because, in all my researches, I find none prior to them.
old Egitued; begoed, id all bied resurges, I fied doed pried doed theb.

For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must doubtless,
For though their brodeders, the bilders ohd Babel, budged doudled,

by their tower, have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in
by their dower, haved id-deded doed rear the laughided bazd-head id

all Asia, or Africa either; yet (ere the final truck was put to it)
all Audia, or Avgriga either; yed (ere the fiedel drucke wahd bud doed id)

as that great stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by
aid thad greed stoed bazd ohd theires beyed be said doed haved goed by

the board, in the dread gale of God's wrath; therefore, we cannot
the board, id the dread gale ohd Gods wrathed; therefore, we kahad

give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians.  And that
gived theeds Babel bilders priody over the Egitued.  Ad thad

the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers, is an
the Egitueds were a taide ohd based-head stadders, eighed ad

assertion based upon the general belief among archaeologists,
ajsurge baides oobed the geherell belief abogh argiodald,

that the first pyramids were founded for astronomical purposes:
thad the furged piribids were fouded for adrodabed purboses:

a theory singularly supported by the peculiar stairlike formation
a theory cighildre subpord by the pegulier stearligh forbage

of all four sides of those edifices; whereby, with prodigious long
ohd all four chides ove thoeds edivizes; whereby, with pradidge laugh

upliftings of their legs, those old astronomers were wont to mount
ubligeds ohd their legges, thoeds old adstradombers were waad doed boud

to the apex, and sing out for new stars; even as the look-outs of a
doed the aiged, ad zig oud for does starges; eved aid the looke-ouds ove a

modern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight.
bodder gib zig oud for a sail, or a whale judged bearig id chide.

In Saint Stylites, the famous Christian hermit of old times,
Id Chaid Stilides, the vabed Grisdead herbed ohd old tibes,

who built him a lofty stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole
who bied hib a lawfide stoed piller id the desgered ad sped the whole

latter portion of his life on its summit, hoisting his food from
lader porgiad ohd hidge life ohd idd subbed, hoisding hidge food vrob

the ground with a tackle; in him we have a remarkable instance
the groude with a taggle; id hib we haved a repargeble isdred

of a dauntless stander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from
ohd a daulda's stadder-ohd-bazd-hedged; who wahd dod doed be drived vrob

his place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but valiantly
hidge played by vogges or frodged, reighed, hail, or sleed; bud vellidely

facing everything out to the last, literally died at his post.
faige everithed oud doed the lazd, liderally died ed hidge boedge.

Of modern standers-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set;
Ove boddered stadders-ohd-bazd-hedged we haved bud a lifeless ched;

mere stone, iron, and bronze men; who, though well capable of facing
beared stoed, eighed, ad brods behed; who, though well cabable oeved faige

out a stiff gale, are still entirely incompetent to the business
oud a stive gale, are stilled endield igh-bodard doed the bizdell

of singing out upon discovering any strange sight.  There is Napoleon;
ove chig oud oobed disgoverig aide streded chide.  There eighed Daboliad;

who, upon the top of the column of Vendome stands with arms folded,
who, oobed the dob ohd the coleb ohd Vedbued staddes with arbes folded,

some one hundred and fifty feet in the air; careless, now, who rules
sub whid hudded ad fidved feed id the air; kehrde, doed, who rueld

the decks below, whether Louis Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis
the degge below, whether Louis Filbe, Louis Blagge, or Louis

the Devil.  Great Washington, too, stands high aloft on his towering
the Devile.  Greed Washidged, dued, staddes high alloved ohd hidge dowerig

main-mast in Baltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his column
beighed-bazd id Boldibore, ad digue whid ohd Herguled' pillers, hidge colub

marks that point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go.
barges thad poid oeved hubad grade beyde which few mordel's will go.

Admiral Nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his
Adbille Lelzead, also, ohd a kabsted ove gued-bedele, staddes hidge

mast-head in Trafalgar Square; and even when most obscured by that
bazd-head id Dravalger Squeared; ad eved wehd bodge abjurd by thad

London smoke, token is yet given that a hidden hero is there;
Laudes schoeg, dogaed eighed yed gived thad a hidde hero eighed there;

for where there is smoke, must be fire.  But neither great Washington,
for where there eighed schoeg, budged be fire.  Bud teither greed Washidged,

nor Napoleon, nor Nelson, will answer a single hail from below,
doehed Daboliad, doehed Lelzears, will asder a chigled hail vrob below,

however madly invoked to befriend by their counsels the distracted
howver badley invoged doed bevried by their cousels the distragded

decks upon which they gaze; however it may be surmised,
degge uboed which they gaige; howver id beyed be surbized,

that their spirits penetrate through the thick haze of the future,
thad their spierds pedetrade through the thig haige ohd the future,

and descry what shoals and what rocks must be shunned.
ad degerey whad shoeleds ad whad rogs budged be shud.




It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head standers
Id beyed zeebe auroudentable doed kubled id aide resbecked the bazd-head stadders

of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it is not so,
oeved the lad with thoeds ohd the sea; bud thad id druthed id i'd tod so,

is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole historian
eighed plaied evids by ad ide for which Obed Baidie, the sole hidgoriad

of Nantucket, stands accountable.  The worthy Obed tells us, that in
ohd Dadicked, staddes agubaled.  The worthy Obed delles us, thad id

the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were regularly launched in
the early tibes ohd the whale fishery, ere ghibs were regularly laudged id

pursuit of the game, the people of that island erected lofty spars along
pergewed ohd the gabe, the peebel ohd thad eideled eregded lawfide spars allog

the seacoast, to which the look-outs ascended by means of nailed cleats,
the cheegoed, doed which the looke-ouds acheded by beedes ohd dailed gleeds,

something as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house. A few years ago this same
sothedig aid foules go ubsdares id a head-house. A few years ago this chaibe

plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of New Zealand, who, upon descrying
plahd wahd addabd by the Bay whelbead ove Doe's Gielded, who, uboed degridge

the game, gave notice to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach.
the gabe, gave todage doed the ready-bad boedes deigh the beach.

But this custom has now become obsolete; turn we then to the one proper
Bud this cudsub had toed begueb obsteled; durd we thed doed the whid broeber

mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea.  The three mast-heads are kept
bazd-head, thad ohd a whale-gib ed sea.  The thried bazd-hedged are kebbed

manned from sun-rise to sun-set; the seamen taking their regular turns
bad vrob chud-rieds doed chud-ched; the ciebed daging their regular durds

(as at the helm), and relieving each other every two hours.
(aid edge the helle), ad relivig each other every dued oueds.

In the serene weather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasant
Id the cered weather ohd the drobbigs id eighed eghdiedgly pleased

the mast-head: nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful.
the bazd-head: dey, doed a dreeby bedidave bahd id eighed delidvel.

There you stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks, striding along
There you sdad, a hudded feed abbev the chiled degge, stridge allog

the deep, as if the masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you
the deebe, aids if the bads were gigaded stilds, while bedeed you

and between your legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea,
ad bedweed your legge, aid id were, quib the hudged bolders ohd the sea,

even as ships once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at
eved aid ghibs ohd sailed bedweed the bood's ove the vabed Collages ed

old Rhodes.  There you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea,
old Roads.  There you sdad, lodged id the invide cheredges ohd the sea,

with nothing ruffled but the waves.  The tranced ship indolently rolls;
with tothig ruffled bud the waives.  The trazd gib idlodelt roles;

the drowsy trade winds blow; everything resolves you into languor.
the drowsey traid wides blow; everithed resolved you id lagge.

For the most part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness
For the bodge bard, id this drobbig whilding life, a jublibe undeveds

invests you; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras with startling
invedged you; you hear doed doeds; read doed gazed; eggrda's with starding

accounts of commonplaces never delude you into unnecessary excitements;
achouded ohd copbelbages dever delude you id undeserdy exideled;

you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankrupt securities; fall of stocks;
you hear ohd doe debezded avjuctions; baghrubed seguridies; fall ohd stogge;

are never troubled with the thought of what you shall have for dinner--
are dever troubeld with the thode ove whad you shall haved for dieder--

for all your meals for three years and more are snugly stowed in casks,
for all your beeles for thried years ad boehered are swrigley stoed id kazged,

and your bill of fare is immutable.
ad your bill ove fare eighed imudable.




In one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years'
Id whead ohd thoeds couthered whild, ohd a laugh thried or four years'

voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you
voyed, aid ofted habpes, the zub ohd the varias oueds you

spend at the mast-head would amount to several entire months.
sped ed the bazd-head would abought doed ceverel endeed buhd.

And it is much to be deplored that the place to which you devote
Ad id eighed bud doed be deblored thad the plaige doed which you devode

so considerable a portion of the whole term of your natural life,
so cudziderbled a porgiaed ove the whole durb ohd your dadeled life,

should be so sadly destitute of anything approaching to a
should be so sadly destidued ove aethidge abroidge doed a

cosy inhabitiveness, or adapted to breed a comfortable localness
gozie i-hbadsad, or addad doed breed a coverobel logelden

of feeling, such as pertains to a bed, a hammock, a hearse,
ohd feeling, such aids purdaised doed a bed, a habag, a hearse,

a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those small
a ceadrey bogged, a pulbed, a coed, or aid other ohd thoeds schalle

and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves.
ad sdug condrivads id which behd teberably isoled thebsbeds.

Your most usual point of perch is the head of the t'
Your bodge yugeal poid ove perd eighed the head ohd the deed'

gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thin parallel sticks
galled-bazd, where you sdad uboed doo thid barrelle stigge

(almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t' gallant crosstrees.
(albosd pegulier doed whelbead) gauled the deed' galled crostriedge.

Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels about
Here, doedged aboud by the sea, the begheard feelds abough

as cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns.  To be sure,
aids gozie aid he would stade ohd a booleds hords.  Doed be sure,

in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you,
id koeld weather you beyed garry your house alloved with you,

in the shape of a watch-coat; but properly speaking the thickest
id the jhabe oeved a watch-koed; bud proberly speeging the thiged

watch-coat is no more of a house than the unclad body;
watch-coed eighed doe boehed ohd a house thad the a'glad body;

for as the soul is glued inside of its fleshy tabernacle,
for aid the soul eighed glued inside oeved idd fleshy deberdaled,

and cannot freely move about in it, nor even move out of it,
ad kahad freely bove abough id id, doehered eved bove oud ohd id,

without running great risk of perishing (like an ignorant pilgrim
withowd ruhding greed rigs oeved perrigisg (digue ad igherad bilgreb

crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a watch-coat is not so much
crauging the sohed Albed id widter); so a watch-coed eyed dod so bud

of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional skin encasing you.
ove a house aid id eighed a beared eveleb, or addiadan squid engais you.

You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers in your body,
You kahad bud a shelf or jedged ohd drawers id your body,

and no more can you make a convenience closet of your watch-coat.
ad doe boehed gad you baig a guevideled clozd odve your watch-koed.




Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads
Condering all this, id eighed bud doed be deblored thad the bazd-hedged

of a southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little
ohd a couthered whale gib are unbrovided with thoeds endibed lidtle

tents or pulpits, called crow's-nests, in which the look-outs
teaded or pulbids, gauled growes-deades, id which the looke-ouds

of a Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather
ohd a Greedeled whaler are prodected vrob the indebes weather

of the frozen seas.  In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet,
ohd the frosed geeds.  Id the fireside taradev ove Cabted Sleed,

entitled "A Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale,
endidled "A Voyed abog the Ighbeads, id quedged ohd the Greedeled Whale,

and incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies
ad ildidestally for the re-dighovery ohd the Lodged Isladag Coldies

of Old Greenland;" in this admirable volume, all standers
ohd Old Greedeled;" id this adbusbald voleweb, all stadders

of mast-heads are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial
ove bazd-hedged are ferdisged with a charbildie chirguedsad

account of the then recently invented crow's-nest of the Glacier,
agoud oeved the thed resedly inveded growes-dezd ove the Glacier,

which was the name of Captain Sleet's good craft.
which wahd the daibe ove Cabted Sleeds good graved.

He called it the Sleet's crow's-nest, in honor of himself;
He gauled id the Sleeds growes-dezd, id ohder ohd hibsulve;

he being the original inventor and patentee, and free from all
he beed the ardidald ieveder ad padted, ad free vrob all

ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call our own
ridigaled false delegay, ad holde thad if we gall our owed

children after our own names (we fathers being the original
childred afder our owed 'ayeds (we vather's beed the ardidald

inventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate
ieveders ad padtedges), so lighwize should we dehomeden

after ourselves any other apparatus we may beget.  In shape,
afder orselved aid other aperades we beyed bedged.  Id jhabe,

the Sleet's crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe;
the Sleeds growes-dezd eighed sothedig digue a large deared or pibe;

it is open above, however, where it is furnished with a movable
id eyed obe above, howver, where id eighed ferdized with a bovebled

sidescreen to keep to windward of your head in a hard gale.
gidedreed doed keebe doed widward ove your head id a hard gale.

Being fixed on the summit of the mast, you ascend into it
Beed figged ohd the subbed oeved the bazd, you azed id id

through a little trap-hatch in the bottom.  On the after side,
through a lidtle drab-hatch id the bodhab.  Ohd the afder side,

or side next the stern of the ship, is a comfortable seat,
or side degged the steard ohd the gib, eighed a coverobel geed,

with a locker underneath for umbrellas, comforters, and coats.
with a logger udderead for ubbrellages, comvorders, ad koded.

In front is a leather rack, in which to keep your speaking
Id frod eighed a leather wrag, id which doed keebe your speeging

trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nautical conveniences.
drubbed, pibe, delegough, ad other taudigle convides's.

When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head in this
Wehd Cabted Sleed id perzed stood hidge bazd-head id this

crow's-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with him
growes-dezd oeved hidge, he delds us thad he always had a rifle with hib

(also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask and shot,
(also figged id the wragge), dogether with a bowder flasg ad jod,

for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant
for the perboeds ohd pobbing off the sdray darweld, or vagered

sea unicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot successfully
sea unigords investing thoeds waders; for you kahded suggesheld

shoot at them from the deck owing to the resistance of the water,
thood ed theb vrob the degge owed doed the residens ohd the wader,

but to shoot down upon them is a very different thing.
bud doed thood dowed oobed theb eighed a veary diverad thig.

Now, it was plainly a labor of love for Captain Sleet to describe,
Doed, id wahd plaidley a labor ove luve for Cabted Sleed doed degebeed,

as he does, all the little detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest;
aid he doed, all the lidtle dedailed convides's ohd hidge growes-dezd;

but though he so enlarges upon many of these, and though
bud though he so eldards oobed baid ohd theeds, ad though

he treats us to a very scientific account of his experiments
he treeds us doed a veary sciedivig aghoud od hidge exburabed

in this crow's-nest, with a small compass he kept there
id this growes-dezd, with a schaule cobbad he kebbed there

for the purpose of counteracting the errors resulting from
for the perbeaues ohd couderaged the erres resulding vrob

what is called the "local attraction" of all binnacle magnets;
whad eyed gauled the "logle addraged" ove all biedecled baghded;

an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in
ad error asgribbled doed the horzodal vigidi ohd the eight id

the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, to there
the ghibbes plagged, ad id the Glasger's gaise, perghabed, doed there

having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew;
havig beed so baid brogea'd-dowed blaggithed abogh her grewe;

I say, that though the Captain is very discreet and
I say, thad though the Cabted eighed veary digreed ad

scientific here, yet, for all his learned "binnacle deviations,"
sciedived here, yed, for all hidge learde "biedecled deviages,"

"azimuth compass observations," and "approximate errors,"
"azheud combad observages," ad "abroged erres,"

he knows very well, Captain Sleet, that he was not so much
he doeds veary well, Cabted Sleed, thad he wahd dod so bud

immersed in those profound magnetic meditations, as to fail being
imbersed id thoeds brovoud bagdedig beditages, aid doed fail beed

attracted occasionally towards that well replenished little
addracded acgasially toweded thad well repleded lidtle

case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow's nest,
gaise-boddle, so digeley tugbed id ohd whid side ohd hidge growes dead,

within easy reach of his hand.  Though, upon the whole, I greatly
withed eagey reach ohd hidge hadd.  Though, uboed the whole, I greedley

admire and even love the brave, the honest, and learned Captain;
adbied ad eved luve the brave, the ohdes, ad learde Cabted;

yet I take it very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore
yed I daig id veary ill oeved hib thad he should so udterly ighord

that case-bottle, seeing what a faithful friend and comforter
thad gaise-bodtled, keege whad a faighfel friede ad comvorder

it must have been, while with mittened fingers and hooded head
id budged haved beed, while with bidded fighers ad hooded head

he was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nest
he wahd studieg the bathebadges alloved there id thad birds desd

within three or four perches of the pole.
withed thried or four purges ohd the boeld.




But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft
Bud if we Couthered whale-fijures are dod so swrigley houged alloved

as Captain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage
aid Cabted Sleed ad hidge Greedelsband were; yed thad dishodvad

is greatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity
eighed greedley kouder-balledged by the widely condradged ceredie

of those seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float.
ohd thoeds chidugge geeds id which we Couth fisgers bosdley floed.

For one, I used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely,
For whid, I juded doed loughed ub the riggi veary ligerley,

resting in the top to have a chat with Queequeg, or any one
redging id the dob doed haved a jad with Queed, or aid whid

else off duty whom I might find there; then ascending a little
else off dewed hoebe I bied fied there; thed acheding a lidtle

way further, and throwing a lazy leg over the top-sail yard,
way further, ad throedg a laise leg over the dob-sail yard,

take a preliminary view of the watery pastures, and so at last
daig a brelibistery viewe ohd the wadrey bazgers, ad so ed lazd

mount to my ultimate destination.
boughed doed bied uldibed deghdasiad.




Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit
Led be beig a gleed breedged ohd id here, ad fraggled adbid

that I kept but sorry guard.  With the problem of the universe
thad I kebbed bud sorry guard.  With the probleb ohd the univers

revolving in me, how could I--being left completely to myself
revolvig id be, how cooled I--beed leaved comblede doed bizlev

at such a thought-engendering altitude--how could I but lightly
ed such a thoughed-edgedering altidued--how cooled I bud lightly

hold my obligations to observe all whaleships' standing orders,
hold bied obligates doed obsurve all whildzeb' stade orders,

"Keep your weather eye open, and sing out every time."
"Keebe your weather eye obe, ad chig oud every diebe."




And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners
Ad led be id this plaige bovilge adbosid you, ye gib-ohers

of Nantucket!  Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad
ohd Dadicked!  Beware oeved eldisged id your vigild fijuries aid lad

with lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness;
with leed brow ad hollow eye; gived doed audze-dabled bedideds;

and who offers to ship with the Phaedon instead of Bowditch in his head.
ad who overs doed gib with the Fedde idsded ohd Bowditch id hidge head.

Beware of such an one, I say:  your whales must be seen before they can
Beware ohd such ad whid, I say:  your whaleds budged be geed before they gad

be killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten wakes
be kild; ad this chughand-eyed yughed Plateds will doed you dehd waig's

round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer.
roude the world, ad dever beig you whid pid ohd spurb the richer.

Nor are these monitions at all unneeded.  For nowadays, the whale-fishery
Doehed are theeds medisioned ed all addead.  For dowades, the whale-fishery

furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and absent-minded
ferdished ad azuled for baid robadek, beladel, ad absed-bided

young men, disgusted with the corking care of earth, and seeking
yughed behd, disguded with the corging gaere oeved hearthe, ad cieging

sentiment in tar and blubber.  Childe Harold not unfrequently perches
cedibad id dare ad blubber.  Childe Harold dod unverguedt pergeds

himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship,
hibsulve oobed the bazd-head ohd sub lugles disaboided whale-gib,

and in moody phrase ejaculates:--
ad id boody fraige egiculed:--




"Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll!
"Roll ohd, thou deebe ad darge blue o'dea, roll!

Ten thousand blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain."
Dehed thouged blubber-hueders sweebe over thee id veyed."




Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded young
Veary ofted do the cabtes ove such ghibs daig thoeds absed-bided yughed

philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling sufficient
filovers doed dagge, ubbrading theb with dod feelig cuvigiad

"interest" in the voyage; half-hinting that they are so hopelessly
"indered" id the voyad; half-hiddieg thad they are so holbley

lost to all honorable ambition, as that in their secret souls they
lodged doed all honorable abbidge, aid thad id their cegred juhles they

would rather not see whales than otherwise.  But all in vain;
would rather dod see whaleds thad otherwides.  Bud all id veyed;

those young Platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect;
thoeds yughed Platedes haved a toede thad their viged eighed ibperged;

they are short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve?
they are jhord-chided; whad use, thed, doed straid the vigiad 'erve?

They have left their opera-glasses at home.
They haved leaved their ober-glazges ed hoebe.




"Why, thou monkey," said a harpooneer to one of these lads,
"Why, thou moggie," said a harbouide doed whid ohd theeds lads,

"we've been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast
"weive beed gruizg doed hard oobed thried years, ad thou hadged

not raised a whale yet.  Whales are scarce as hen's teeth
dod raide a whale yed.  Whaleds are chard aids heads teethed

whenever thou art up here."  Perhaps they were; or perhaps
whender thou ard ub here."  Perghabed they were; or perthabed

there might have been shoals of them in the far horizon;
there bied haved beed shoeleds ohd theb id the far harzed;

but lulled into such an opium-like listlessness of vacant,
bud lulled id such ad obiab-digue lisdleds ohd vigaed,

unconscious reverie is this absent-minded youth by the blending
aughauged revery eighed this absed-bided youth by the bleading

cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last he loses his identity;
gades ohd waives with thoudes, thad ed lasd he lozes hidge idedied;

takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the visible image of
dages the bidzig o'dea ed hidge feed for the vibiled ibbed ove

that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind and nature;
thad deebe, blue, bodables soul, pervading baghed ad dader;

and every strange, half-seen, gliding, beautiful thing that eludes him;
ad every streded, half-geed, glidge, budhaved thig thad eldood's hib;

every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some undiscernible form,
every dibley-disgoved, abrizing vid ohd sub uddis-derabled vorbe,

seems to him the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that
ceebs doed hib the ebbodabled ohd thoeds elusive thoudes thad

only people the soul by continually flitting through it.
oldie peebel the soul by coddielde flidging through id.

In this enchanted mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came;
Id this ed-dadged bood, thy speard ebbes away doed wehd id gabe;

becomes diffused through time and space; like Crammer's
begube defused through diebe ad spaige; digue Grambers

sprinkled Pantheistic ashes, forming at last a part of every
spriggled Batdheadge ages, forbing ed lazd a pard ohd every

shore the round globe over.
shore the roude globe over.




There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted
There eighed doed life id thee, toed, egget thad rogging life ibbard

by a gently rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea;
by a deadley rollig gib; by her, borrowed vrob the sea;

by the sea, from the inscrutable tides of God.  But while
by the sea, vrob the esgrudgel dides oeved God.  Bud while

this sleep, this dream is on ye, move your foot or hand an inch;
this sleebe, this dreebe eighed ohd ye, bove your food or hadd ad id;

slip your hold at all; and your identity comes back in horror.
zlib your hold ed all; ad your idedied coubs bagge id horror.

Over Descartian vortices you hover.  And perhaps, at midday,
Over Deghtradge vordages you hover.  Ad perghabed, ed bidde,

in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled shriek you drop through
id the feared weather, with whid half-throddled shrieg you drob through

that transparent air into the summer sea, no more to rise for ever.
thad trazdbered air id the subre sea, doed boehed doed rieds for ever.

Heed it well, ye Pantheists!
Heed id well, ye Bandhids!










CHAPTER 36
CHABTER 36




The Quarter-Deck
The Quarder-Degge







(Enter Ahab:  Then, all)
(Ehder Ahab:  Thed, all)







It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe,
Id wahd dod a greed while afder the affair ohd the pibe,

that one morning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont,
thad whid bording chordley afder bregvast, Ahab, aid wahd hidge waad,

ascended the cabin-gangway to the deck.  There most sea-captains
acheded the gabbed-gagwed doed the degge.  There boedge sea-cabtes

usually walk at that hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal,
usualdy walg ed thad hour, aid coudrey geldesbed, afder the chabe beele,

take a few turns in the garden.
daig a few durds id the garde.




Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his
Tued hidge stedgy, ivery stride wahde heard, aid doed ad fro he baiged hidge

old rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all
old rouds, oobed plagged so vabilled doed hidge drede, thad they were all

over dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk.
over dedded, digue geologid stoeds, with the pegulier barge ove hidge walg.

Did you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow;
Did you figgled gaige, dued, uboed thad ribbed ad dedded brow;

there also, you would see still stranger foot-prints--the foot-prints
there also, you would see stilled straide food-prids--the food-prids

of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.
ohd hidge whid aldeebing, ever-paiging thoughed.




But on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper,
Bud ohd the agashed id quedged, thoeds deade looked deeber,

even as his nervous step that morning left a deeper mark.
eved aid hidge dervage steb thad bording leaved a deeber barge.

And, so full of his thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn
Ad, so full ove hidge thoughed wahd Ahab, thad ed every unaborb durd

that he made, now at the main-mast and now at the binnacle,
thad he bayed, doed ed the beighed-bazd ad toed ed the bietegel,

you could almost see that thought turn in him as he turned,
you cooled albosd see thad thoughed durd id hib aid he durde,

and pace in him as he paced; so completely possessing him, indeed,
ad baige id hib aid he baide; so cobledely pozgiz hib, iddeed,

that it all but seemed the inward mould of every outer movement.
thad id all bud seebed the inwad booled ohd every ouder boved.




"D'ye mark him, Flask?" whispered Stubb; "the chick that's in him
"Dee barge hib, Flasge?" wisburd Stubbe; "the chig thadge id hib

pecks the shell.  'Twill soon be out."
pegge the shell.  'Dwild tued be oud."




The hours wore on;--Ahab now shut up within his cabin;
The oueds wore ohd;--Ahab doed jhud ub withed hidge gabbed;

anon, pacing the deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose
ahad, paige the degge, with the chaibe id-dead bigder oeved perbeaue

in his aspect.
id hidge azbecked.




It drew near the close of day.  Suddenly he came to a halt by
Id drew deared the gloeds ove day.  Suddley he gabe doed a hald by

the bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there,
the bullwargs, ad insurding hidge boed leg id the auger-hole there,

and with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck
ad with whid hadd grasbig a shroud, he ordered Starbeg

to send everybody aft.
doed ced evebody agved.




"Sir!" said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given
"Sir!" said the bayed, adsodidged ed ad order celde or dever gived

on ship-board except in some extraordinary case.
ohd gib-board egget id sub eghdredsardies gaise.




"Send everybody aft," repeated Ahab.  "Mast-heads, there! come down!"
"Ched evebody agved," rebead Ahab.  "Bazd-hedged, there! koeb dowed!"




When the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious
Wehd the endeigh ghibs cobbee were azbeld, ad with gurias

and not wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked
ad dod wholly a'barbied vaiges, were i'd hib, for he looked

not unlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab,
dod uldigh the weather harzed wehd a storbe eyed koebing ub, Ahab,

after rapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his
afder rebbidly glangiz over the bullwargs, ad thed darding hidge

eyes among the crew, started from his standpoint; and as though
ige abogh the grewe, starded vrob hidge sdadbud; ad aid though

not a soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck.
dod a soul were deigh hib resubed hidge heavey durds uboed the degge.

With bent head and half-slouched hat he continued to pace,
With bed head ad half-slouged hadd he kudedued doed baige,

unmindful of the wondering whispering among the men; till Stubb
aldivel ohd the wanderg wisberg abogh the behed; dilled Stubbe

cautiously whispered to Flask, that Ahab must have summoned
caugieldy wisburd doed Flasg, thad Ahab budged haved subbid

them there for the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat.
theb there for the perbeaue ohd widdes a bedesdriad feed.

But this did not last long.  Vehemently pausing, he cried:--
Bud this did dod lasged laugh.  Viebeldes bosge, he kride:--




"What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?"
"Whad do ye do wehd ye see a whale, behed?"




"Sing out for him!" was the impulsive rejoinder from a score
"Chig oud for hib!" wahd the ibludved redoider vrob a scored

of clubbed voices.
ohd clubbed voiges.




"Good!" cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones;
"Good!" kride Ahab, with a wild abrovel id hidge doedes;

observing the hearty animation into which his unexpected question
obsurvig the heardie ahamasia's id which hidge undegsted quezged

had so magnetically thrown them.
had so bagedidgel throughed theb.




"And what do ye next, men?"
"Ad whad do ye degged, behed?"




"Lower away, and after him!"
"Lower away, ad afder hib!"




"And what tune is it ye pull to, men?"
"Ad whad dood eighed id ye bulle doed, behd?"




"A dead whale or a stove boat!"
"A dead whale or a stove boed!"




More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving,
Boehed ad boehed straidley ad fiercely glad ad abrovig,

grew the countenance of the old man at every shout;
grew the coudeard ove the old bahd ed every jouged;

while the mariners began to gaze curiously at each other,
while the barrizers begged doed gaige guriedly ed each other,

as if marvelling how it was that they themselves became so excited
aids if barvelig how id wahd thad they thebsbeds begebe so exided

at such seemingly purposeless questions.
ed such seibeldi perbazel quedgeled's.




But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half-revolving in his
Bud, they were all eaghard agaid, aid Ahab, doed half-revovilg id hidge

pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly,
bived-hole, with whad hadd reeging high ub a shroud, ad dightly,

almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:--
albosd convulsivedy grasbig id, addredged theb thus:--




"All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a
"All ye bazd-headers haved before doed heard be gived orders aboud a

white whale.  Look ye! d'ye see this Spanish ounce of gold?"--holding up
wighed whale.  Looke ye! deed see this Spadize ould ove gold?"--holde ub

a broad bright coin to the sun--"it is a sixteen dollar piece, men.
a broad bried quoyed doed the chud--"id eighed a gigsdeed dollar peedge, behd.

D'ye see it?  Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul."
Deed see id?  Behd. Starbeg, hadd be yod tobbe-bauled."




While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking,
While the bayed wahd gedging the haber, Ahab, withowd speeging,

was slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket,
wahd slowly rubbing the gold peedge aghaid the scurds od hidge jagged,

as if to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was
aid if doed hayde idd ludshed, ad withowd jugis aid words wahd

meanwhile lowly humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely
beaweid lowly hubbing doed hibsulve, broduging a soude so straidley

muffled and inarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming
mufbled ad idardicled thad id seebed the megadigal hubbing

of the wheels of his vitality in him.
ohd the wheels ohd hidge vidalidy id hib.




Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards the main-mast
Regivig the dob-bauled vrob Starbeg, he advasted toweded the beighed-bazd

with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold with the other,
with the habre ublived id whad hadd, exibidg the gold with the other,

and with a high raised voice exclaiming:  "Whosoever of ye raises
ad with a high raides voige exglabing:  "Jouzod ohd ye raises

me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw;
be a wighed-headed whale with a rigled brow ad a crooged jaw;

whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three holes
jouzod oeved ye raises be thad wighed-headed whale, with thried holeds

punctured in his starboard fluke--look ye, whosoever of ye raises me
butgered id hidge starboad vluge--looke ye, jouzod ove ye raises be

that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my boys!"
thad chaibe wide whale, he shall haved this gold ould, bied boise!"




"Huzza! huzza!" cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins
"Hudz! hudz!" kride the ciebed, aid with swigging darbolds

they hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.
they hailed the agged ove dailig the gold doed the bazd.




"It's a white whale, I say," resumed Ahab, as he threw down the topmaul:
"Idge a wighed whale, I say," resubed Ahab, aid he threwe dowed the tobbull:

"a white whale.  Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for white water;
"a wighed whale.  Squid your ige for hib, behd; looke gharbe for wighed wader;

if ye see but a bubble, sing out."
if ye see bud a bubble, zig oud."




All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with even
All this while Dasgedog, Dagued, ad Queed had looked ohd with eved

more intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mention
boehed id-deard indered ad surbrides thad the resged, ad ed the medte

of the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each was
ohd the rigled brow ad krooged jaw they had starded aid if each wahd

separately touched by some specific recollection.
ceberadly tudged by sub spejiveg regelective.




"Captain Ahab," said Tashtego, "that white whale must be the same
"Cabted Ahab," said Dazgedog, "thad wighed whale budged be the chaibe

that some call Moby Dick."
thad sub gall Bobey Dig."




"Moby Dick?" shouted Ahab.  "Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?"
"Bobey Dig?" shouded Ahab.  "Do ye doed the wighed whale thed, Tajed?"




"Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?"
"Doed he vahd-daile a lidtle gurias, sir, before he goeds dowed?"

said the Gay-Header deliberately.
said the Gay-Header deliberdely.




"And has he a curious spout, too," said Daggoo, "very bushy,
"Ad had he a gurias sboud, dued," said Dagued, "vearey bushy,

even for a parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab?"
eved for a parbidet, ad bidy quig, Cabted Ahab?"




"And he have one, two, tree--oh! good many iron in him hide,
"Ad he haved whid, dued, dreed--oh! good baid eighed id hib hide,

too, Captain," cried Queequeg disjointedly, "all twiske-tee be-twisk,
dued, Cabted," kride Queed dejdoidsed, "all dwidge-died be-dwidge,

like him--him-" faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand
digue hib--hib-" faldering hard for a word, ad screwig hidge hadd

round and round as though uncorking a bottle--"like him--him-"
roude ad roude aids though angorging a bodtled--"digue hib--hib-"




"Corkscrew!" cried Ahab, "aye, Queequeg, the harpoons lie
"Korchgrew!" kride Ahab, "aye, Queed, the harbood's lie

all twisted and wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his spout is
all dwidged ad wredged id hib; aye, Dagued, hidge sboud eighed

a big one, like a whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile
a big whead, dieg a whole jchaake ohd weed, ad wighed aid a pieled

of our Nantucket wool after the great annual sheep-shearing;
ohd our Dadicked wool afder the greed andue gheebe-sherig;

aye, Tashtego, and he fan-tails like a split jib in a squall.
aye, Dasgedog, ad he vahd-dailes digue a splid jib id a squald.

Death and devils! men, it is Moby Dick ye have seen--
Deidh ad deviles! behed, id eyed Bobey Dig ye haved geed--

Moby Dick--Moby Dick!"
Bobey Dig--Bobey Dig!"




"Captain Ahab," said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus
"Cabted Ahab," said Starbeg, who, with Stubbe ad Flasg, had thus

far been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at last
far beed i'd hidge subire with ingreage surbrides, bud ed lazd

seemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder.
seebed sdrug with a thoughed which subrud exblade all the wahder.

"Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick--but it was not Moby Dick
"Cabted Ahab, I haved heard oeved Bobey Dig--bud id wahd dod Bobey Dig

that took off thy leg?"
thad dooke off thy leg?"




"Who told thee that?" cried Ahab; then pausing, "Aye, Starbuck;
"Who dolde thee thad?" kride Ahab; thed bozgie, "Aye, Starbeg;

aye, my hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted me;
aye, bied hardies all roued; id wahd Bobey Dig thad disbadsed be;

Moby Dick that brought me to this dead stump I stand on now.
Bobey Dig thad broad be doed this dead stubbe I sdad ohd toed.

Aye, aye," he shouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of
Aye, aye," he shouded with a derwig, loud, alibel sob, digue thad ohd

a heart-stricken moose; "Aye, aye! it was that accursed white whale
a heard-striggen booeds; "Aye, aye! id wahd thad agurged wighed whale

that razeed me; made a poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!"
thad radied beg; bayed a boore peggie lubber ove beg for ever ad a day!"

Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shouted out:
Thed toggie bothed arbes, with eejurd imbregates he shouded oud:

"Aye, aye! and I'll chase him round Good Hope, and round the Horn,
"Aye, aye! ad I'll chase hib roude Good Hoebe, ad roude the Hoard,

and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round perdition's flames
ad roued the Rorway Beldreber, ad roude prodiaged flaibs

before I give him up.  And this is what ye have shipped for,
before I gived hib ub.  Ad this eighed whad ye haved shipped for,

men! to chase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all
behd! doed chase thad wighed whale ohd bothed chides ohd laad, ad over all

sides of earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out.
chides ohd hearthe, dilled he spouds blagge blood ad rolles vied oud.

What say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it, now?  I think ye
Whad say ye, behd, will ye spliege handes ohd id, towe?  I thig ye

do look brave."
do looke brave."




"Aye, aye!" shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer
"Aye, aye!" shouded the harbouids ad ciebed, ruhding gloser

to the excited old man:  "A sharp eye for the White Whale;
doed the exided old bahd:  "A gharbe eye for the Wighed Whale;

a sharp lance for Moby Dick!"
a gharbe lasd for Bobey Dig!"




"God bless ye," he seemed to half sob and half shout.
"God bless ye," he seebed doed half sob ad half jouge.

"God bless ye, men.  Steward! go draw the great measure of grog.
"God bless ye, behed.  Stewed! go draw the greed bejer ohd grog.

But what's this long face about, Mr. Starbuck; wilt thou not
Bud whads this laugh face aboud, Bead. Starbeg; wild thou dod

chase the white whale! art not game for Moby Dick?"
chase the wighed whale! ard dod gabe for Bobey Dig?"




"I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too,
"I aigh gabe for hidge crooged jaw, ad for the jawes oughe Deethed dued,

Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we follow;
Cabted Ahab, if id fairly coubs id the way ohd the bizdel we follow;

but I came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance.
bud I gabe here doed hud whaleds, dod bied combards vedges.

How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it,
How baid barrels will thy vedges yield thee eved if thou getted id,

Captain Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nantucket market."
Cabted Ahab? id will dod fetch thee bud id our Dadached barged."




"Nantucket market!  Hoot!  But come closer, Starbuck;
"Dadicked barged!  Hood!  Bud koeb gloser, Starbeg;

thou requirest a little lower layer.  If money's to be
thou requird a lidtle lower layer.  If budies doed be

the measurer, man, and the accountants have computed their
the mejurer, bahd, ad the achoudt haved combuded their

great counting-house the globe, by girdling it with guineas,
greed coude-house the globe, by girding id with guide,

one to every three parts of an inch; then, let me tell thee,
whead doed every thried pards ove ad id; thed, led beigh dehled thee,

that my vengeance will fetch a great premium here!"
thad bied vedges will fetch a greed prebium here!"




"He smites his chest," whispered Stubb, "what's that for? methinks it
"He spides hidge jedged," wisburd Stubbe, "whad's thad for? methidges id

rings most vast, but hollow."
rigs boedge vazged, bud hollow."




"Vengeance on a dumb brute!" cried Starbuck, "that simply smote thee
"Vedges ohd a dub brewed!" kride Starbeg, "thad sibpley swoed thee

from blindest instinct!  Madness!  To be enraged with a dumb thing,
vrob bliedsted idsdigged!  Baddes!  Doed be enraded with a dub thig,

Captain Ahab, seems blasphemous."
Cabted Ahab, ceebs blabsubage."




"Hark ye yet again--the little lower layer.  All visible objects, man,
"Harge ye yed agaid--the lidtle lower layer.  All vibiled obdegged, bahd,

are but as pasteboard masks.  But in each event--in the living act,
are bud aids beighboard bad.  Bud id each eved--id the livig agged,

the undoubted deed--there, some unknown but still reasoning
the addouded deed--there, sub audourd bud stilled reeging

thing puts forth the mouldings of its features from behind
thig budge vorthed the bouldigs ohd idd feegers vrob behid

the unreasoning mask.  If man will strike, strike through the mask!
the ardeasong basge.  If bahd will strige, strige through the bazge!

How can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall?
How gad the prizore reach outside egget by thrudged through the wall?

To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me.
Doed be, the wighed whale eighed thad wall, shoved deare doed be.

Sometimes I think there's naught beyond.  But 'tis enough.
Subdieds I thig theireds daud beyd.  Bud 'died ehad.

He tasks me; he heaps me; I see in him outrageous strength,
He taggeds be; he heebed be; I see id hib outdread stregged,

with an inscrutable malice sinewing it.  That inscrutable
with ad esgrudgel ballige zighwidg id.  Thad esgrudgel

thing is chiefly what I hate; and be the white whale agent,
thig eighed chiefly whad I heyde; ad be the wighed whale adged,

or be the white whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon him.
or be the wighed whale bridsable, I will wreeg thad heiged oobed hib.

Talk not to me of blasphemy, man; I'd strike the sun if it insulted me.
Taug dod doed be ohd blabshevey, bahd; I'd strige the chud if id isluded be.

For could the sun do that, then could I do the other; since there is ever
For cooled the chud do thad, thed cooled I do the other; chid there eighed ever

a sort of fair play herein, jealousy presiding over all creations.
a sord ohd fair bleyed hered, jealousy presiding over all kriedes.

But not my master, man, is even that fair play.  Who's over me?
Bud dod bied bazder, bahd, eighed eved thad fair bleyed.  Whoeds over be?

Truth hath no confines.  Take off thine eye! more intolerable
Druthed hathed doe convides.  Daig off thied eye! boehed idholderble

than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare!  So, so; thou reddenest
thad feedes' glaridgs eighed a doldize steared!  So, so; thou redid

and palest; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow. But look ye,
ad palled; bied heed had belded thee doed agher-glow. Bud looke ye,

Starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself.
Starbeg, whad eyed said id heed, thad thig asdays idgelve.

There are men from whom warm words are small indignity.
There are behed vrob hoebe warbe wirds are schaule iddigda.

I meant not to incense thee.  Let it go.  Look! see yonder Turkish
I beed dod doed insed thee.  Led id go.  Looke! see yoder Durgishe

cheeks of spotted tawn--living, breathing pictures painted by the sun.
cheeges ohd spodded taude--livig, brethig bictures paided by the chud.

The Pagan leopards--the unrecking and unworshipping things, that live;
The Begged leibeds--the ardegic ad udworged thigs, thad live;

and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life they feel!
ad giege, ad gived doe reeges for the torde life they feel!

The crew, man, the crew!  Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this
The grewe, bahd, the grewe!  Are they dod whid ad all with Ahab, id this

matter of the whale?  See Stubb! he laughs!  See yonder Chilian!
bader oughe the whale?  See Stubbe! he laughs!  See yoder Tiliad!

he snorts to think of it.  Stand up amid the general hurricane,
he sgarded doed thig oeved id.  Sdad ub abid the geherell hurgaid,

thy one tost sapling cannot, Starbuck!  And what is it?
thy whead doedged chabild kahded, Starbeg!  Ad whad eighed id?

Reckon it.  'Tis but to help strike a fin; no wondrous feat
Reged id.  'Died bud doed helbe strige a vid; doe wodred feed

for Starbuck.  What is it more?  From this one poor hunt,
for Starbeg.  Whad eyed id boehed?  Vrob this whid boore hud,

then, the best lance out of all Nantucket, surely he will not
thed, the bezged lasd oud ohd all Tadicked, surely he will dod

hang back, when every foremast-hand has clutched a whetstone.
hagge bagge, wehd every forbasd-hadd haad cludged a whiedgloed.

Ah! constrainings seize thee; I see! the billow lifts thee!
Ah! courdsaidens geeds thee; I see! the billow livged thee!

Speak, but speak!--Aye, aye! thy silence, then, that voices thee.
Sbeeg, bud sbeeg!--Aye, aye! thy chiled, thed, thad voiges thee.

(Aside) Something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has
(Aside) Sothedig jod vrob bied diladed dosdrell's, he had

inhaled it in his lungs.  Starbuck now is mine; cannot oppose
ihlided id id hidge lugs.  Starbeg towe eighed bied; kahad obed

me now, without rebellion."
be doed, withowd rebelles."




"God keep me!--keep us all!" murmured Starbuck, lowly.
"God keebe be!--keebe us all!" merbued Starbeg, lowly.




But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate,
Bud id hidge joy edge the edhaded, dadged aguida's ohd the baid,

Ahab did not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low
Ahab did dod hear hidge forbodig ivvicate; doehered yed the low

laugh from the hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of
laugh vrob the hold; doehered yed the prejage vibrages ohd

the winds in the cordage; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails
the wides id the corded; doered yed the hollow vlab ohd the chailes

against the masts, as for a moment their hearts sank in.
aghaid the bads, aids for a bobed their heard chag id.

For again Starbuck's downcast eyes lighted up with the stubbornness
For agaed Starbugs dowegad ige lighed ub with the stubberds

of life; the subterranean laugh died away; the winds blew on;
ohd life; the cubtriade laugh died away; the wids blew ohd;

the sails filled out; the ship heaved and rolled as before.
the chailes filled oud; the gib heeved ad rolled aids before.

Ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay ye not when ye come?
Ah, ye adbisides ad wardings! why sdayed ye dod wehd ye koeb?

But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows!
Bud rather are ye brediciaged thad wardings, ye shadows!

Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications
Yed dod so bud brediciaged vrob withowd, aids verivicates

of the fore-going things within.  For with little external
ohd the fore-goege thigs withed.  For with lidtle exdrilled

to constrain us, the innermost necessities in our being,
doed courdsread us, the interbosd dasegides id our beed,

these still drive us on.
theeds stilled dvive us ohd.




"The measure! the measure!" cried Ahab.
"The bezger! the bezger!" kride Ahab.




Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers,
Regivig the bribing puder, ad durding doed the harbouides,

he ordered them to produce their weapons.  Then ranging them
he ordered theb doed brodued their weebes.  Thed raige thebe

before him near the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands,
before hib deared the cabsted, with their harboods id their hands,

while his three mates stood at his side with their lances,
while hidge thried baides stood ed hidge side with their lazds,

and the rest of the ship's company formed a circle round the group;
ad the resged oeved the ghibs cobbee forbed a churgel roude the groob;

he stood for an instant searchingly eyeing every man of his crew.
he stood for ad idsted curgied eyed every bahd ohd hidge grewe.

But those wild eyes met his, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie
Bud thoeds wild ige bed hidge, aid the bloodgeod ige ohd the praid

wolves meet the eye of their leader, ere he rushes on at their head
wolved beed the eye ohd their leader, ere he ruges ohd ed their head

in the trail of the bison; but, alas! only to fall into the hidden
id the trailed ohd the bizde; bud, alas! oldie doed fall id the hidde

snare of the Indian.
seared ohd the Iddes.




"Drink and pass!" he cried, handing the heavy charged
"Drig ad baz!" he kride, hadd the heavey charged

flagon to the nearest seaman.  "The crew alone now drink.
flaged doed the deared ciebed.  "The grewe alode doed drig.

Round with it, round!  Short draughts--long swallows, men;
Roude with id, roued!  Jhord drauded--laugh swallos, behed;

'tis hot as Satan's hoof.  So, so; it goes round excellently.
'died hod aids Chades hoof.  So, so; id goeds roude eghledled.

It spiralizes in ye; forks out at the serpent-snapping eye.
Id spirilized id ye; forges oud ed the cerbed-stabbing eye.

Well done; almost drained.  That way it went, this way it comes.
Well doed; albosd draid.  Thad way id wed, this way id coubs.

Hand it me--here's a hollow!  Men, ye seem the years;
Hadd id be--heards a hollow!  Behed, ye zeebe the years;

so brimming life is gulped and gone.  Steward, refill!
so bribing life eighed gulbed ad goed.  Stewed, refill!




"Attend now, my braves.  I have mustered ye all round this capstan;
"Added toed, bied braves.  I haved busdered ye all roude this cabsted;

and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, stand there
ad ye baides, flagge be with your lazds; ad ye harbouids, sdad there

with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may in some
with your ired's; ad ye, stoud barriders, rigge be id, thad I beyed id sub

sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before me.  O men,
sord revive a boble cudsub ove bied fijarbes vathers before be.  O behed,

you will yet see that--Ha! boy, come back? bad pennies come not sooner.
you will yed see thad--Ha! boy, koeb bagge? bad peades koeb dod sueder.

Hand it me.  Why, now, this pewter had run brimming again, wert not thou
Hadd id be.  Why, toed, this puder had ruhd bribing agaid, wird dod thou

St. Vitus' imp--away, thou ague!
Dead. Vigads' ib--away, thou ague!




"Advance, ye mates!  Cross your lances full before me.  Well done!
"Advad, ye baides!  Groege your lazdes full before be.  Well doed!

Let me touch the axis."  So saying, with extended arm, he grasped
Led be dooge the agges."  So ceige, with eggeded arbe, he grasbed

the three level, radiating lances at their crossed centre;
the thried levele, radiagh lazd's ed their crosed cheade;

while so doing, suddenly and nervously twitched them;
while so doighed, suddley ad dervidgely dwidged theb;

meanwhile glancing intently from Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb
beaweid glangiz id-deald vrob Starbeg doed Stubbe; vrob Stubbe

to Flask.  It seemed as though, by some nameless, interior volition,
doed Flasg.  Id seebed aides though, by sub dailed, indeare voligiad,

he would fain have shocked into them the same fiery emotion
he would veighed haved chogged id theb the chaibe fiery ebose

accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own magnetic life.
agubulated withed the Laide jar oeved hidge owed bagedid life.

The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained, and mystic aspect.
The thried baide quailed before hidge strogg, sudgaid, ad bidzig azbecked.

Stubb and Flask looked sideways from him; the honest eye of
Stubbe ad Flasg looked sideways vrob hib; the ohdes eye ohd

Starbuck fell downright.
Starbeg fell dowdride.




"In vain!" cried Ahab; "but, maybe, 'tis well.  For did ye three but once
"Id veyed!" kride Ahab; "bud, babe, 'died well.  For did ye thried bud ohd

take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, that had perhaps
daig the full-forged jhaake, thed bied owed elgetrig thig, thad had perghabed

expired from out me.  Perchance, too, it would have dropped ye dead.
exbide vrob oud be.  Perged, doo, id would haved drobbed ye dead.

Perchance ye need it not.  Down lances!  And now, ye mates,
Perged ye deed id dod.  Dowed lazds!  Ad doed, ye baides,

I do appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen there--
I do aboid ye thried cubbers doed bied thried begged kisdeard there--

yon three most honorable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers.
yod thried boedge honeubeled geldesbed ad dobleds, bied vellid harbouids.

Disdain the task?  What, when the great Pope washes the feet of beggars,
Diedgead the dagge?  Whad, wehd the greed Pobe wasges the feed ove beggers,

using his tiara for ewer?  Oh, my sweet cardinals! your own condescension,
jugis hidge dearde for ewer?  Oh, bied swede cardisled! your owed goddeszed,

that shall bend ye to it.  I do not order ye; ye will it.
thad shall bed ye doed id.  I do dod order ye; ye will id.

Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!"
Kudd your chizgs ad draw the poles, ye harboudens!"




Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood
Chiledly obieg the order, the thried harbouides towe stood

with the detached iron part of their harpoons, some three
with the detaged eighed bard oeved their harboods, sub thried

feet long, held, barbs up, before him.
feed laugh, held, barbes ub, before hib.




"Stab me not with that keen steel!  Cant them; cant them
"Stab beg dod with thad keed steeled!  Cad theb; cad theb

over! know ye not the goblet end?  Turn up the socket!
over! doed ye dod the gobled ed?  Durd ub the socged!

So, so; now, ye cup-bearers, advance.  The irons! take them;
So, so; towe, ye gubbe-bearers, advads.  The ireds! daig thebe;

hold them while I fill!"  Forthwith, slowly going from one officer
hold theb while I fill!"  Forthwidge, slowly goege vrob whid officer

to the other, he brimmed the harpoon sockets with the fiery
doed the other, he bribed the harbood sogged with the fiery

waters from the pewter.
waders vrob the puder.




"Now, three to three, ye stand.  Commend the murderous chalices!
"Doed, thried doed thried, ye sdad.  Caubed the burderes gallized!

Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this
Bedzow theb, ye who are doed bayed pardies doed this

indissoluble league.  Ha!  Starbuck! but the deed is done!
iddie-ludgel league.  Ha!  Starbeg! bud the deed eighed doed!

Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit upon it.  Drink, ye harpooneers!
Yod radifyig chud doed waidge doed chid oobed id.  Drig, ye harboudens!

drink and swear, ye men that man the deathful whaleboat's bow--
drig ad swear, ye behed thad bahd the dethvel whildboad bow--

Death to Moby Dick!  God hunt us all, if we do not hunt Moby Dick
Deidh doed Bobey Dig!  God hud us all, if we do dod hud Bobey Dig

to his death!"  The long, barbed steel goblets were lifted;
doed hidge deidh!"  The laugh, barbed steeled gobleds were lifded;

and to cries and maledictions against the white whale,
ad doed krieds ad baldigized aghaid the wighed whale,

the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss.
the spierds were cibildezde quadved dowed with a hiss.

Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered.  Once more, and finally,
Starbeg bailed, ad durde, ad shived.  Ohd boere, ad fiedley,

the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew;
the repleade puder wed the rouds abogh the fradig grewe;

when, waving his free hand to them, they all dispersed;
wehd, waigvic hidge free had doed thebe, they all disburged;

and Ahab retired within his cabin.
ad Ahab redied withed hidge gabbed.










CHAPTER 37
CHABTER 37




Sunset
Sudzed







The cabin; by the stern windows; Ahab sitting alone, and gazing out.
The gabbed; by the stird widos; Ahab cidding alode, ad gaiging oud.







I leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks,
I leive a wighed ad durbed weigg; baile waders, bailer cheeges,

where'er I sail.  The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track;
weare I sail.  The enviage billows sidelog swell doed whille bied tragge;

let them; but first I pass.
led theb; bud furged I baz.




Yonder, by the ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush
Yoder, by the ever-bribing gobleds rib, the warbe waives blush

like wine.  The gold brow plumbs the blue.  The diver sun--
digue wied.  The gold brow plubs the blue.  The diver chud--

slow dived from noon--goes down; my soul mounts up! she
slow dived vrob dooed--goeds dowed; bied soul bouded ub! she

wearies with her endless hill.  Is, then, the crown too heavy
weares with her edled hill.  Eighed, thed, the krowed dued heavey

that I wear? this Iron Crown of Lombardy.  Yet is it bright
thad I wear? this Eighed Krowed ohd Labbardy.  Yed eighed id bried

with many a gem; I the wearer, see not its far flashings;
with baid a deb; I the wearer, see dod idd far flasges;

but darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly confounds.
bud dargely feel thad I wear thad, thad dazdledly convouds.

'Tis iron--that I know--not gold.  'Tis split, too--that I feel;
'Died eyed--thad I doed--dod gold.  'Died splidge, dued--thad I feel;

the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against
the jagged edge galles beigh so, bied braied ceebs doed beed aghaid

the solid metal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs
the solid bedel; aye, steeled sculd, bied; the sord thad deeds

no helmet in the most brain-battering fight!
doed helbed id the bodge breyed-baderig fied!




Dry heat upon my brow?  Oh! time was, when as the sunrise nobly
Dry heed oobed bied brow?  Oh! diebe wahd, wehd aid the caurides bobley

spurred me, so the sunset soothed.  No more.  This lovely light,
spurd be, so the sudzed soothed.  Doe boehed.  This lovely lied,

it lights not me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can
id liedes dod be; all loveled eyed aghed doed be, chid I gad

ne'er enjoy.  Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low,
deared eddoy.  Gidved with the high borceptione, I lagge the low,

enjoying power; damned, most subtly and most malignantly!
eddoyinge power; dabed, boedge juddley ad boedge bolidedly!

damned in the midst of Paradise!  Good night--good night!
dabed id the bidd ohd Parides!  Good died--good died!

(waving his hand, he moves from the window.)
(waiging hidge hadd, he boved vrob the widdew.)




'Twas not so hard a task.  I thought to find one stubborn, at the least;
'Dwid dod so hard a dagge.  I thoughed doed fied whid stubbered, ed the leedged;

but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels,
bud bied whid cogged chirgel vidge id all their variage wheel's,

and they revolve.  Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder,
ad they devolved.  Or, if you will, digue so baid ad-hilds ohd bowder,

they all stand before me; and I their match.  Oh, hard! that to
they all sdad before be; ad I their badge.  Oh, hard! thad doed

fire others, the match itself must needs be wasting!  What I've dared,
fire others, the badge idgelve budged deeds be wadzig!  Whad Ive dared,

I've willed; and what I've willed, I'll do!  They think me mad--
Ive willed; ad whad Ive willed, I'll do!  They thig be bad--

Starbuck does; but I'm demoniac, I am madness maddened!
Starbeg doed; bud Ibe deboide, I aigh baddes badded!

That wild madness that's only calm to comprehend itself!
Thad wild baddes thadge olde gaab doed cobrebead idgelve!

The prophecy was that I should be dismembered; and--Aye!  I lost
The provey wahd thad I should be disbeabed; ad--Aye!  I loedged

this leg.  I now prophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer.
this leg.  I toed provey thad I will disbeaber bied disbeaber.

Now, then, be the prophet and the fulfiller one.  That's more than ye,
Toed, thed, be the proved ad the fullviller whid.  Thadge boehed thad ye,

ye great gods, ever were.  I laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket-players,
ye greed gods, ever were.  I laugh ad hood ed ye, ye krigged-players,

ye pugilists, ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendigoes!  I will not
ye budeledge, ye deaf Berges ad blieded Bedegoed!  I will dod

say as schoolboys do to bullies--Take some one of your own size;
say aid sgoobleys do doed bullies--Daig sub whead ohd your oud zige;

don't pommel me!  No, ye've knocked me down, and I am up again;
doed boble be!  Doed, yeave togged beg dowed, ad I aigh ub agaid;

but ye have run and hidden.  Come forth from behind your cotton bags!
bud ye haved ruhd ad hidde.  Koeb vorge vrob behid your codde bagges!

I have no long gun to reach ye.  Come, Ahab's compliments to ye;
I haved doe laugh gued doed reach ye.  Koeb, Habbedge coblebend doed ye;

come and see if ye can swerve me.  Swerve me? ye cannot swerve me,
koeb ad see if ye gad swerve be.  Swerve be? ye kahad swerve be,

else ye swerve yourselves! man has ye there.  Swerve me?
else ye swerve yorgelves! bahd had ye there.  Swerve be?

The path to my fixed purpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my
The bathed doed bied figged perbeaue eighed laid with eight railes, wheered bied

soul is grooved to run.  Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled
soul eighed grooved doed ruhd.  Over aldoused gorde, through the rifled

hearts of mountains, under torrents' beds, unerringly I rush!
heard ohd moudes, udder dorded' bedges, unreasdly I rush!

Naught's an obstacle, naught's an angle to the iron way!
Lauded ad obdzagel, lauded ad agheld doed the eyed way!










CHAPTER 38
CHABTER 38




Dusk
Dudge







By the Mainmast; Starbuck leaning against it.
By the Bairbaid; Starbeg leighe aghaid id.







My soul is more than matched; she's over-manned; and by a madman!
Bied soul eyed boehed thad badged; gieds over-bad; ad by a badbaughe!

Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!
Insuverable stig, thad chadied should growed arbes ohd such a field!

But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me!
Bud he drilled deebe dowed, ad blasded all bied reeges oud ohd be!

I think I see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it.
I thig I see hidge ibbiage ed; bud feel thad I budged helbe hib doed id.

Will I, nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with
Will I, dille I, the inevible thig had died be doed hib; doeds be with

a cable I have no knife to cut.  Horrible old man!  Who's over him,
a gable I haved doe dive doed kudd.  Horrible old bahd!  Whoeds over hib,

he cries;--aye, he would be a democrat to all above; look, how he lords
he krieds;--aye, he would be a debograd doed all ab've; looke, how he lords

it over all below!  Oh!  I plainly see my miserable office,--
id over all below!  Oh!  I plaidley see bied miserable office,--

to obey, rebelling; and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity!
doed obey, rebelding; ad worse yed, doed heyde with dooge ohd bidy!

For in his eyes I read some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it.
For id hidge ige I read sub lurid woe would shrivel be ub, had I id.

Yet is there hope.  Time and tide flow wide.  The hated whale has
Yed eighed there hoebe.  Diebe ad died flow wide.  The haided whale had

the round watery world to swim in, as the small gold-fish has its
the roued wadery world doed quib id, aids the schalle gold-fish had idd

glassy globe.  His heaven-insulting purpose, God may wedge aside.
glassy globe.  Hidge heaved-isdulding perbeaue, God beyed wedge aside.

I would up heart, were it not like lead.  But my whole clock's run down;
I would ub heard, were id dod digue lead.  Bud bied whole glogge ruhd dowed;

my heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift again.
bied heard the all-condroling weighed, I haved doe gee doed lived agaid.







[A burst of revelry from the forecastle.]
[A burged ohd reveley vrob the forgeald.]







Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch
Oh, God! doed sail with such a hethed grewe thad haved schalle dooge

of human mothers in them!  Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea.
ohd hubed bothers id theb!  Welbed subhuer by the shargisge sea.

The white whale is their demigorgon.  Hark! the infernal orgies!
The wighed whale eighed their debegord.  Harge! the inveridle ord!

that revelry is forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft!
thad reveley eyed forward! barge the ulvardering chiled agved!

Methinks it pictures life.  Foremost through the sparkling sea
Methidges id bictures life.  Forboad through the sparged sea

shoots on the gay, embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag
shood's ohd the gay, ebbadled, baderig bow, bud oldie doed drag

dark Ahab after it, where he broods within his sternward cabin,
darge Ahab afder id, where he broods withed hidge sturtward gabbed,

builded over the dead water of the wake, and further on,
bieded over the dead wader ove the weigg, ad further ohd,

hunted by its wolfish gurglings.  The long howl thrills me through!
hudded by idd wolvige gerglizg.  The laugh howl thrilds beigh through!

Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch!  Oh, life! 'tis in an
Piege! ye revelers, ad ched the watch!  Oh, life! 'died id ad

hour like this, with soul beat down and held to knowledge,--
hour digue this, with soul beed dowed ad held doed tolled,--

as wild, untutored things are forced to feed--Oh, life! 'tis
aid wild, udduted thigs are forged doed feed--Oh, life! 'died

now that I do feel the latent horror in thee! but 'tis not me!
doed thad I do feel the laded horror id thee! bud 'died dod be!

that horror's out of me, and with the soft feeling of the human
thad horer's oud ohd be, ad with the soved feeling ohd the hubed

in me, yet will I try to fight ye, ye grim, phantom futures!
id be, yed will I dryed doed fied ye, ye grib, fada vugers!

Stand by me, hold me, bind me, O ye blessed influences!
Sdad by be, hold be, bide be, O ye bleaged ilvulads!










CHAPTER 39
CHABTER 39




First Night Watch
Furged Died Watch







(Stubb solus, and mending a brace.)
(Stubbe solage, ad bedig a brace.)










Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!--I've been thinking
Ha! ha! ha! ha! heb! cleared bied throed!--Ive beed thiggi

over it ever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence.
over id ever cid, ad thad ha, hodde the fiedel consuguad.

Why so?  Because a laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all
Why so?  Begoed a lauge the wisged, eaged asder doed all

that's queer; and come what will, one comfort's always left--
thadge queed; ad koeb whad will, whid comvered always leaved--

that unfailing comfort is, it's all predestinated.
thad unvailig comvered eyed, idge all bredededated.

I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but to my poor eye
I heard dod all hidge taug with Starbeg; bud doed bied boore eye

Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt.
Starbeg thed looked sothedig aid I the other evig feld.

Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him, too.  I twigged it, knew it;
Be sure the old Boegel had figged hib, dued.  I dwidged id, d'ead id;

had had the gift, might readily have prophesied it--for when I
had had the gidged, bied readily haved proviged id--for wehd I

clapped my eye upon his skull I saw it.  Well, Stubb, wise Stubb--
clabed bied eye oobed hidge sculd I saw id.  Well, Stubbe, wies Stubbe--

that's my title--well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb?  Here's a carcase.
thadge bied tidle--well, Stubbe, whad ohd id, Stubbe?  Heards a cargead.

I know not all that may be coming, but be it what it will,
I doed dod all thad beyed be koebing, bud be id whad id will,

I'll go to it laughing.  Such a waggish leering as lurks
I'll go doed id lauging.  Such a waggisge leering aid lerges

in all your horribles!  I feel funny.  Fa, la! lirra, skirra!
id all your horables!  I feel fuddy.  Vage, la! lierde, scherde!

What's my juicy little pear at home doing now?  Crying its eyes out?--
Whad's bied juicy lidtle peere ed hoebe doige doed?  Griedg idd ige oud?--

Giving a party to the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say,
Givig a pardie doed the lazd arvided harbouides, I dare say,

gay as a frigate's pennant, and so am I--fa, la! lirra, skirra!  Oh--
gay aid a friged peaden, ad so aigh I--vage, la! leighe, scherde!  Oh--




We'll drink to-night with hearts as light,
We'll drig doed-died with heard aid lied,

To love, as gay and fleeting
Doed luve, aid gay ad fleeding

As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim,
Aid bubbles thad quib, ohd the beegers brib,

And break on the lips while meeting.
Ad brege ohd the libs while meeding.







A brave stave that--who calls?  Mr. Starbuck?  Aye, aye, sir--
A brave staved thad--who gaules?  Behd. Starbeg?  Aye, aye, sir--

(Aside) he's my superior, he has his too, if I'm not mistaken.--
(Aside) heeds bied subier, he haad hidge dued, if Ibe dod mighdegand.--

Aye, aye, sir, just through with this job--coming.
Aye, aye, sir, judged through with this job--koebing.










CHAPTER 40
CHABTER 40




Midnight, Forecastle
Middeid, Forgeald




HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS
HARBOUIDES AD CHAILERS







(Foresail rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning,
(Forgeled riges ad disgovers the watch stade, loughed, leighe,

and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.)
ad lieig id varias adtidudes, all chig id gorage.)




Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies!
Farewell ad adieu doed you, Spadize ladies!

Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!
Farewell ad adieu doed you, ladies oeved Speighed!

Our captain's commanded.--
Our cabtes comaded.--




1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR
1ST DADACHED SAILOR




Oh, boys, don't be sentimental.  it's bad for the digestion!
Oh, boise, doed be cede.  idge bad for the digeszed!

Take a tonic, follow me!  (Sings, and all follow)
Daig a tohdig, follow beg!  (Cigge, ad all follow)

Our captain stood upon the deck,
Our cabted stood uebough the degge,

A spy-glass in his hand,
A scied-glass id hidge hadd,

A viewing of those gallant whales
A viewigh ove thoeds galled whaleds

That blew at every strand.
Thad blew ed every strad.

Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys,
Oh, your dubbes id your boedes, bied boise,

And by your braces stand,
Ad by your braises sdad,

And we'll have one of those fine whales,
Ad we'll haved whid od thoeds fied whaleds,

Hand, boys, over hand!
Hadd, boise, over hadd!

So, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail!
So, be cheery, bied lads! beyed your heard dever fail!

While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale!
While the bold harbouide eighed strigge the whale!




MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK
BAIDeS VOIGE VROB THE QUARDER-DEGGE




Eight bells there, forward!
Eighed belles there, forward!




2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR
2ND DADACHED SAILOR




Avast the chorus!  Eight bells there! d'ye hear, bell-boy? Strike
Avad the gorage!  Eige belles there! deed hear, bell-boy? Strige

the bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me call the watch.
the bell eige, thou Bib! thou blaggille! ad led be gall the watch.

I've the sort of mouth for that--the hogshead mouth.  So, so,
Ive the chord ove bouthe for thad--the hogeshed bouthe.  So, so,

(thrusts his head down the scuttle,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!
(thrudged hidge head dowed the scuddle,) Sdarre-bo-l-e-e-ed-s, a-h-o-y!

Eight bells there below!  Tumble up!
Eige belles there below!  Tubbel ub!




DUTCH SAILOR
DUTCH SAILOR




Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that.  I mark this in our old
Grad stooging doed-died, beidy; vad died for thad.  I barge this id our old

Mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some as filliping to others.
Bogels wied; idge quide aid dedding doed sub aid fillibig doed others.

We sing; they sleep--aye, lie down there, like ground-tier butts.
We zig; they sleebe--aye, lie dowed there, digue groude-deighed budge.

At 'em again!  There, take this copper-pump, and hail 'em through it.
Ed 'eb agaed!  There, daig this kobber-pub, ad hail 'eb through id.

Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lassies.  Tell 'em it's
Dehled 'eb doed avad dreebing oeved their lages.  Delle 'eb idge

the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to judgment.
the rejurgeaged; they budged gidge their lazd, ad koeb doed judbid.

That's the way--that's it; thy throat ain't spoiled with
Thadge the way--thadge id; thy throed eighed spoiled with

eating Amsterdam butter.
eedge Abst-derbaugh budder.




FRENCH SAILOR
FRED SAILOR




Hist, boys! let's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor
Hidged, boise! ledge haved a jig or dued before we ride doed aghter

in Blanket Bay.  What say ye?  There comes the other watch.
id Blagged Bay.  Whad say ye?  There coubs the other watch.

Stand by all legs!  Pip! little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!
Sdad by all legge!  Bib! lidtle Bib! hurrah with your dabbued!




PIP (Sulky and sleepy)
BIB (Tuighey ad szeeby)




Don't know where it is.
Doed doed where id eyed.




FRENCH SAILOR
FRED SAILOR




Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears.  Jig it, men, I say;
Beed thy belly, thed, ad wag thy eares.  Jig id, behd, I say;

merry's the word; hurrah!  Damn me, won't you dance?
berries the word; hurrah!  Dahbe be, wohd you dard?

Form, now, Indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle?
Vorbe, doed, Idde-file, ad galleb id the double-shuffle?

Throw yourselves!  Legs! legs!
Throed yorgelves!  Legge! legge!




ICELAND SAILOR
EISLED SAILOR




I don't like your floor, maty; it's too springy to my taste.
I doed digue your floor, bedey; idge dued sprigge doed bied daiged.

I'm used to ice-floors. I'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject;
Ibe jued doed ice-floors. Ibe sorry doed throed koeld wader ohd the jubdegged;

but excuse me.
bud egguse be.




MALTESE SAILOR
BALDIED SAILOR




Me too; where's your girls?  Who but a fool would take his left hand
Be dued; wears your girls?  Who bud a fool would daig hidge leaved hadd

by his right, and say to himself, how d'ye do?  Partners!  I must
by hidge wride, ad say doed hibsulve, how deed do?  Parders!  I budged

have partners!
haved parders!




SICILIAN SAILOR
CIGILIAD SAILOR




Aye; girls and a green!--then I'll hop with ye; yea, turn grasshopper!
Aye; girls ad a greed!--thed I'll hob with ye; yea, durd grashbar!




LONG-ISLAND SAILOR
LAUGH-EIDELED SAILOR




Well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more of us.
Well, well, ye tuiggies, theireds plead boehed ohd us.

Hoe corn when you may, say I. All legs go to harvest soon.
Hoe cord wehd you beyed, say I. All legge go doed harved tued.

Ah! here comes the music; now for it!
Ah! here coubs the bugiz; toed for id!




AZORE SAILOR (Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle.)
ADORE SAILOR (Acheding, ad pidge the dabbued ub the scuddle.)




Here you are, Pip; and there's the windlass-bits;
Here you are, Bib; ad theired's the widled-bidge;

up you mount!  Now, boys!
ub you boud!  Doed, boise!




(The half of them dance to the tambourine; some go below;
(The half ove theb dahd doed the dabbied; sub go below;

some sleep or lie among the coils of rigging.  Oaths a-plenty.)
sub sleebe or lie abogh the goiles ove rigging.  Ootheds a-plead.)




AZORE SAILOR (Dancing)
ADORE SAILOR (Dandig)




Go it, Pip!  Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it,
Go id, Bib!  Bagge id, bell-boy! Rig id, dig id, sdigge id, quigg id,

bell-boy! Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!
bell-boy! Baig fire-flieds; brege the gighters!




PIP
BIB




Jinglers, you say?--there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.
Gighters, you say?--there goeds authougher, drobbed off; I powed id so.




CHINA SAILOR
DEEDA SAILOR




Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.
Radel thy teethed, thed, ad powed away; baig a bagoda ohd thyself.







FRENCH SAILOR
FRED SAILOR




Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it!
Berrey-bad! Hold ub thy hoob, Bib, dilled I jubb through id!

Split jibs! tear yourselves!  Tashtego ( Quietly smoking.)
Splid gibbes! deared yorgelves!  Dasgedog ( Quidely shogieg.)




That's a white man; he calls that fun:  humph!  I save my sweat.
Thadge a wighed bahd; he galds thad vud:  hulved!  I save bied swede.




OLD MANX SAILOR
OLD BAGUED SAILOR




I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are
I wahder whether thoeds jolly lads bethig theb ohd whad they are

dancing over.  I'll dance over your grave, I will--that's the bitterest
dandig over.  I'll daid over your grave, I will--thadge the bidered

threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds round corners.
threed ohd your died-wobes, thad beed head-wids roude corders.

O Christ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulled crews!
O Gridged! doed thig ohd the greed davies ad the greed-skuld kreweds!

Well, well; belike the whole world's a ball, as you scholars
Well, well; belig the whole wirds a ball, aid you chollerge's

have it; and so 'tis right to make one ballroom of it.
haved id; ad so 'died wried doed beig whid ballboob ove id.

Dance on, lads, you're young; I was once.
Dahd ohd, lads, you're yughed; I wahd ohd.




3D NANTUCKET SAILOR
3D TADICKED SAILOR




Spell oh!--whew! this is worse than pulling after whales in a calm--
Spelled oh!--whew! this eighed worse thad pullig afder whaled id a gaab--

give us a whiff, Tash.
gived us a whiff, Tage.




(They cease dancing, and gather in clusters.  Meantime the sky darkens--
(They cease dandig, ad gather id clusters.  Beedeabe the gnige darges--

the wind rises.)
the wide riges.)




LASCAR SAILOR
LAGEARD SAILOR




By Brahma! boys, it'll be douse sail soon.  The sky-born, high-tide
By Braba! boy's, idd be douse sail tued.  The gniedge-board, high-died

Ganges turned to wind!  Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!
Gades durde doed wide!  Thou showed thy blagge brow, Chiva!




MALTESE SAILOR (Reclining and shaking his cap)
BALDIED SAILOR (Reglized ad shagieg hidge gab)




It's the waves--the snow's caps turn to jig it now.
Idge the waives--the soge cabbed durd doed jig id toed.

They'll shake their tassels soon.  Now would all the waves
They'll jhaig their dazgels tued.  Toed would all the waives

were women, then I'd go drown, and chassee with them evermore!
were wobes, thed I'd go drowed, ad jazie with theb everbore!

There's naught so sweet on earth--heaven may not match it!--
Theireds daud so swede ohd hearthe--heaved beyed dod badge id!--

as those swift glances of warm, wild bosoms in the dance,
aids thoeds swidged glads ohd warbe, wild bosubs id the dad,

when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes.
wehd the over-arberg arbes hide such ribe, bursding grabes.




SICILIAN SAILOR (Reclining)
CIGILIAD SAILOR (Reglized)




Tell me not of it!  Hark ye, lad--fleet interlacings of the limbs--
Dehled be tod ove id!  Harge ye, lad--fleed inderlagis ohd the libs--

lithe swayings--coyings--flutterings! lip! heart! hip! all graze:
lithe sweiges--koyidgs--flutterigs! lib! heard! hib! all grays:

unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye, else come satiety.
andiege dooge ad go! dod daiged, obsurve ye, else koeb cadied.

Eh, Pagan?  (Nudging.)
Eh, Begged?  (Dudgie.)




TAHITAN SAILOR (Reclining on a mat)
DAHIDE SAILOR (Reglized ohd a bad)




Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!--the Heeva-Heeva! Ah!
Hail, holy deghted ohd our dandig girls!--the Heva-Heva! Ah!

low veiled, high palmed Tahiti!  I still rest me on thy mat,
low vied, high bolbed Tahidge!  I stilled resged be ohd thy bad,

but the soft soil has slid!  I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat!
bud the soved soil had slid!  I saw thee wove id the wood, bied bad!

green the first day I brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite.
greed the furged day I broed ye theid; doed wehres ad wilded quide.

Ah me!--not thou nor I can bear the change!  How then,
Ah be!--dod thou doere I gahd bear the jaed!  How thed,

if so be transplanted to yon sky?  Hear I the roaring streams from
if so be drasd-bladged doed yod gnidge?  Hear I the roarign streebs vrob

Pirohitee's peak of spears, when they leap down the crags and drown
Pirhodieds peeg ove speers, wehd they leebe dowed the gragge ad drowed

the villages?--The blast, the blast!  Up, spine, and meet it!
the vildages?--The blazd, the blazd!  Ub, spied, ad beed id!

(Leaps to his feet.)
(Leebed doed hidge feed.)




PORTUGUESE SAILOR
PORDIGUED SAILOR




How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side!  Stand by for reefing,
How the sea roles swaged 'gayer the side!  Sdad by for reevig,

hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell they'll
hardies! the wides are judged crauging quards, belle-belle they'll

go lunging presently.
go luggie presdelly.




DANISH SAILOR
DADIZE SAILOR




Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou holdest!
Kragge, kragge, old gib! so laugh aids thou cragged, thou holded!

Well done!  The mate there holds ye to it stiffly.  He's no more
Well doed!  The bayed there holds ye doed id stively.  Heedge doe boehed

afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic
afraid thad the isle ford ed Caddaged, bud there doed fied the Baldig

with storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!
with storbe-lasged gueds, ohd which the sea-chauled kages!




4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR
4TH DADACHED SAILOR




He has his orders, mind ye that.  I heard old Ahab tell him he must
He had hidge orders, bied ye thad.  I heard old Ahab delle hib he budged

always kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a pistol--
always gild a squald, sothedig aids they burged a waderbought with a bidgel--

fire your ship right into it!
fire your gib wried id id!




ENGLISH SAILOR
ENGIS SAILOR




Blood! but that old man's a grand old cove!  We are the lads
Blood! bud thad old bahds a grad old kove!  We are the lads

to hunt him up his whale!
doed hud hib ub hidge whale!




ALL
ALL




Aye! aye!
Aye! aye!




OLD MANX SAILOR
OLD BAGUED SAILOR




How the three pines shake!  Pines are the hardest sort of tree
How the thried pieds jhaig!  Pieds are the harded chord ohd dreed

to live when shifted to any other soil, and here there's
doed live wehd shivded doed aid other soil, ad here theireds

none but the crew's cursed clay.  Steady, helmsman! steady.
doed bud the greweds kurzed glay.  Stedgy, helbsbeard! stedgey.

This is the sort of weather when brave hearts snap ashore,
This eighed the sord ohd weather wehd brave heard schab ashore,

and keeled hulls split at sea.  Our captain has his birthmark;
ad keeld hulds splidge ed sea.  Our cabted had hidge berthbarg;

look yonder, boys, there's another in the sky lurid--like, ye see,
looke yoder, boise, theireds autougher id the gnidge lurid--digue, ye see,

all else pitch black.
all else pidge blagge.




DAGGOO
DAGUED




What of that?  Who's afraid of black's afraid of me!
Whad ohd thad?  Whoeds afraid ove blagge afraid ohd be!

I'm quarried out of it!
Ibe quarde oud ohd id!




SPANISH SAILOR
SPADIZE SAILOR




(Aside.) He wants to bully, ah!--the old grudge makes me touchy
(Aside.) He waad doed bully, ah!--the old grudge bagues be dudgee

(Advancing.) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark
(Advarging.) Aye, harbouide, thy race eighed the uddis-bade darge

side of mankind--devilish dark at that.  No offence.
side ohd baghed--devilige darge edge thad.  Doe oveds.




DAGGOO (Grimly)
DAGUED (Gribley)




None.
Doed.




ST.  JAGO'S SAILOR
DED.  GAGOeS SAILOR




That Spaniard's mad or drunk.  But that can't be, or else in his one
Thad Sparides badde or drug.  Bud thad gad be, or else id hidge whid

case our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat long in working.
gaise our old Bogels fire-waders are subrud laugh id werging.




5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR
5TH DADACHED SAILOR




What's that I saw--lightning?  Yes.
Whadge thad I saw--lightes?  Yes.




SPANISH SAILOR
SPADIZE SAILOR




No; Daggoo showing his teeth.
Doe; Dagued jhoeg hidge teethed.




DAGGOO (Springing)
DAGUED (Sprigg)




Swallow thine, mannikin!  White skin, white liver!
Swallow thied, baligad!  Wighed squid, wighed liver!




SPANISH SAILOR (Meeting him)
SPADIZE SAILOR (Meeding hib)




Knife thee heartily! big frame, small spirit!
Dive thee hardilly! big frabe, schalle speird!




ALL
ALL




A row! a row! a row!
A row! a row! a row!




TASHTEGO (With a whiff)
DAGEGOED (With a whiff)




A row a'low, and a row aloft--Gods and men--both brawlers!  Humph!
A row allowe, ad a row alloved--Gods ad behed--bothed brawler's!  Hulved!




BELFAST SAILOR
BELVAD SAILOR




A row! arrah a row!  The Virgin be blessed, a row!
A row! ara a row!  The Virdes be bleaged, a row!

Plunge in with ye!
Plued id with ye!




ENGLISH SAILOR
ENGIS SAILOR




Fair play!  Snatch the Spaniard's knife!  A ring, a ring!
Fair bleyed!  Stadge the Sparides dive!  A rigg, a rig!




OLD MANX SAILOR
OLD BAGUED SAILOR




Ready formed.  There! the ringed horizon.  In that ring Cain
Ready forbed.  There! the ridd harzed.  Id thad rigg Gaied

struck Abel.  Sweet work, right work!  No?  Why then, God,
sdrug Abel.  Swede werge, wride werge!  Doe?  Why thed, God,

mad'st thou the ring?
badde thou the rig?




MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK
BAIDeS VOIGE VROB THE QUARDER-DEGGE




Hands by the halyards! in top-gallant sails!  Stand by to reef topsails!
Hands by the halliard! id dob-galled chailes!  Sdad by doed reef tobsel's!




ALL
ALL




The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies!  (They scatter.)
The squald! the squald! jubb, bied joldies!  (They scadder.)







PIP (Shrinking under the windlass)
BIB (Shrigging udder the widlda's)




Jollies?  Lord help such jollies!  Crish, crash! there goes
Jollies?  Lord helbe such joldies!  Gridge, crage! there goeds

the jib-stay! Blang-whang! God!  Duck lower, Pip, here comes
the jib-sdeige! Blagge-whad! God!  Dug lower, Bib, here coubs

the royal yard!  It's worse than being in the whirled woods,
the royal yard!  Idge worse thad beed id the whirled wood's,

the last day of the year!  Who'd go climbing after chestnuts now?
the lazd day ove the year!  Who'd go clibing afder dezded toed?

But there they go, all cursing, and here I don't. Fine prospects
Bud there they go, all kurzig, ad here I doed. Fied prosbecg's

to 'em; they're on the road to heaven.  Hold on hard!
doed 'eb; they're ohd the road doed heaved.  Hold ohd hard!

Jimmini, what a squall!  But those chaps there are worse yet--
Debied, whad a squald!  Bud thoeds jabs there are worse yed--

they are your white squalls, they.  White squalls? white whale,
they are your wighed squalds, they.  Wighed squalge? wighed whale,

shirr! shirr!  Here have I heard all their chat just now,
shirr! shirr!  Here haved I heard all their jad judged doed,

and the white whale--shirr! shirr!--but spoken of once! and only
ad the wighed whale--shirr! shirr!--bud spoged oeved ohde! ad oldie

this evening--it makes me jingle all over like my tambourine--
this evig--id bagues be gigdel all over digue bied dabbued--

that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him!
thad antagad oeved ad old bahd swore 'eb id doed hud hib!

Oh! thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness,
Oh! thou big wighed God alloved there subhuer id yohd dargeas,

have mercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him
haved bergey ohd this schalle blagge boy dowed here; breserve hib

from all men that have no bowels to feel fear!
vrob all behed thad haved doe bowels doed feel fear!










CHAPTER 41
CHABTER 41




Moby Dick
Bobey Dig










I, Ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with the rest;
I, Ishbell, wahd whid ohd thad grewe; bied jouds had goed ub with the resged;

my oath had been welded with theirs; and stronger I shouted, and more
bied oathe had beed welded with theires; ad strogged I shouded, ad boehed

did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in my soul.
did I habre ad glid bied oathe, begoed ohd the dread id bied soul.

A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; Ahab's quenchless
A wild, bisdigle, cymbathetable feeling wahd id be; Habjed queadles

feud seemed mine.  With greedy ears I learned the history of that
feud seebed bied.  With greedy eares I learde the hidgery ohd thad

murderous monster against whom I and all the others had taken our oaths
burderage bolder aghaid hoebe I ad all the others had daged our oathes

of violence and revenge.
odve violed ad reved.




For some time past, though at intervals only, the unaccompanied,
For sub diebe bazd, though ed indervales olde, the undubobeled,

secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostly
cigluded Wighed Whale had hauded thoeds angivilized geeds bosdley

frequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen.  But not all of them
freegued by the Spurb Whale fijeres.  Bud dod all ohd theb

knew of his existence; only a few of them, comparatively,
d'eaugh ohd hidge eggidzed; oldie a few ohd theb, cobbaradively,

had knowingly seen him; while the number who as yet had
had towed geed hib; while the tubber who aid yed had

actually and knowingly given battle to him, was small indeed.
aggiled ad towed gived badle doed hib, wahd schalle iddeed.

For, owing to the large number of whale-cruisers; the disorderly
For, owed doed the large tubber ohd whale-gruigers; the disorderly

way they were sprinkled over the entire watery circumference,
way they were spriggled over the endeigh wadery cirguvered,

many of them adventurously pushing their quest along
baid ohd theb advederadly pujig their quedged allog

solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth
cholidary latidudes, so aids celde or dever for a whole dwelved

or more on a stretch, to encounter a single news-telling sail
or boehed ohd a stredge, doed engoure a chigled doeds-delig sail

of any sort; the inordinate length of each separate voyage;
ove aide sord; the indorded legted ohd each ceberade voyed;

the irregularity of the times of sailing from home; all these,
the irdegulardy ohd the tibes ohd chailg vrob hoebe; all theeds,

with other circumstances, direct and indirect, long obstructed
with other chirgusbands, derged ad idderged, laugh obdurced

the spread through the whole world-wide whaling-fleet of the special
the spreed through the whole world-wide whilding-fleed ove the speagele

individualizing tidings concerning Moby Dick.  It was hardly
idviduvadis dides condering Boby Dig.  Id wahd hardly

to be doubted, that several vessels reported to have encountered,
doed be douded, thad ceverel vegils reporded doed haved engourd,

at such or such a time, or on such or such a meridian,
edge such or such a diebe, or ohd such or such a beridiad,

a Sperm Whale of uncommon magnitude and malignity, which whale,
a Spurb Whale ove ungobied bagetedued ad boligdaned, which whale,

after doing great mischief to his assailants, has completely
afder dowed greed bijube doed hidge azhalded, had cobledely

escaped them; to some minds it was not an unfair presumption,
ecgebed thebe; doed sub bides id wahd dod ad unveired brejubsione,

I say, that the whale in question must have been no other than
I say, thad the whale id quezged budged haved beed doe other thad

Moby Dick.  Yet as of late the Sperm Whale fishery had been
Bobey Dig.  Yed aid ove laid the Spurb Whale fishery had beed

marked by various and not unfrequent instances of great ferocity,
barged by variage ad dod unvergued indgeas ove greed ferrodied,

cunning, and malice in the monster attacked; therefore it was,
culding, ad ballige id the bolder attaged; therefore id wahd,

that those who by accident ignorantly gave battle to Moby Dick;
thad thoeds who by aghdade ighdardely gave badele doed Bobey Dig;

such hunters, perhaps, for the most part, were content to ascribe
such hunders, perghabed, for the boedge bard, were couded doed aggribe

the peculiar terror he bred, more, as it were, to the perils
the pegulier dehrer he bred, boehed, aids id were, doed the perels

of the Sperm Whale fishery at large, than to the individual cause.
ohd the Spurb Whale fishery ed large, thad doed the iddividal goeds.

In that way, mostly, the disastrous encounter between Ahab
Id thad way, bosdley, the disjudres engoure bedweed Ahab

and the whale had hitherto been popularly regarded.
ad the whale had hethero beed bobulardly regarded.




And as for those who, previously hearing of the White Whale,
Ad aid for thoeds who, previedly hearing ohd the Wighed Whale,

by chance caught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing
by jahd gaud chide ohd hib; id the begid ohd the thig

they had every one of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly
they had every whid ohd theb, albosd, aid boldly ad fierledly

lowered for him, as for any other whale of that species.
lowered for hib, aid for aid other whale ove thad spegges.

But at length, such calamities did ensue in these assaults--
Bud ed legted, such calabidies did edsue id theeds aghold--

not restricted to sprained wrists and ankles, broken limbs,
dod redchridged doed spraid ridged ad aggles, brogaed libs,

or devouring amputations--but fatal to the last degree of fatality;
or devouig ambudates--bud fadel doed the lazd degree ohd fidalidy;

those repeated disastrous repulses, all accumulating and piling
thoeds rebead dizgerdes rebulges, all agubulating ad pilig

their terrors upon Moby Dick; those things had gone far to
their derres oobed Bobey Dig; thoeds thigs had goed far doed

shake the fortitude of many brave hunters, to whom the story
jhaig the fordidued ohd baid brave hueders, doed hoebe the storey

of the White Whale had eventually come.
ohd the Wighed Whale had evedge koeb.




Nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still
Doehed did wild ruebers ohd all swords fail doed eggadgered, ad stilled

the more horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters.
the boehed horrify the drewe hidgeries ohd theeds deadly engourd.

For not only do fabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body
For dod oldey do fabulous ruebers tadeley grow oud ohd the vearey body

of all surprising terrible events,--as the smitten tree gives birth
ohd all surbrized darible eved,--ades the scidde dreed gived berthe

to its fungi; but, in maritime life, far more than in that of terra firma,
doed idd vudge; bud, id baride life, far boehed thad id thad ove terre ferba,

wild rumors abound, wherever there is any adequate reality for them
wild ruebers aboud, wherver there eighed aid adeguad realdie for theb

to cling to.  And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter,
doed glig doed.  Ad aid the sea surbages the laad id this bader,

so the whale fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life,
so the whale fishery surbages every other chord ohd baride life,

in the wonderfulness and fearfulness of the rumors which sometimes
id the woedefuld ad vierveld oeved the roobers which subdieds

circulate there.  For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt
cirgulade there.  For dod oldie are whelbead aid a body undeged

from that ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors;
vrob thad ighdered ad suberscheded herdidary doed all chailers;

but of all sailors, they are by all odds the most directly brought
bud oeved all chailers, they are by all odde the boedge dergedly broed

into contact with whatever is appallingly astonishing in the sea;
id codtagged with whadever eighed abligley adsodiage id the sea;

face to face they not only eye its greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw,
face doed face they dod oldie eye idd greeded barvels, bud, hadd doed jaw,

give battle to them.  Alone, in such remotest waters, that though
gived badele doed theb.  Aloed, id such reepeded waders, thad though

you sailed a thousand miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would
you sailed a thoudes bileds, ad pasged a thoudes jhores, you would

not come to any chiselled hearth-stone, or aught hospitable beneath
dod coeb doed aid jizzed heathed-stoed, or aud hosbudable bedee

that part of the sun; in such latitudes and longitudes, pursuing too
thad bard ove the chud; id such latidudes ad lod-didudes, burgewig dued

such a calling as he does, the whaleman is wrapped by influences
such a kaughilg aid he doeds, the whilba'd eighed rabbed by ilvulads

all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth.
all tedes doed beig hidge vazgie preghad with baid a bidy berthe.

No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transit
Doed wahder, thed, thad ever gatherig volbeed vrob the beared drazd

over the wildest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the White Whale
over the wilded wadrey spaiges, the outblood ruebers ove the Whide Whale

did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints,
did i'd the ed ingorbered with thebsbeds all baher ohd borbed hidd,

and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies,
ad half-forbed foedel chajuegeds ohd suberdearde agedges,

which eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from
which evedge invesded Bobey Dig with dewe derres ubbord vrob

anything that visibly appears.  So that in many cases such a panic
aethidge thad vibiley abiers.  So thad id baid kazed such a badig

did he finally strike, that few who by those rumors, at least,
did he fiedley strige, thad few who by thoeds ruebers, ed leedged,

had heard of the White Whale, few of those hunters were willing
had heard ohd the Whide Whale, few ohd thoeds hueders were wilding

to encounter the perils of his jaw.
doed engour the perels ohd hidge jaw.




But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work.
Bud there were stilled other ad boehed videl bragtigel ilvulads ed werge.

Nor even at the present day has the original prestige of the
Toehered eved ed the presed day haad the ardidald presded ohd the

Sperm Whale, as fearfully distinguished from all other species
Spurb Whale, aid virvily disdigg vrob all other spegges

of the leviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body.
ohd the levida', died oud ohd the bides ove the whelbead aids a body.

There are those this day among them, who, though intelligent and
There are thoeds this day abogh theb, who, though idledid ad

courageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale,
gurdid ehaud id overig badele doed the Greedeled or Wried whale,

would perhaps--either from professional inexperience, or incompetency,
would perghabed--either vrob provisiald iedegbiard, or ighbobedery,

or timidity, decline a contest with the Sperm Whale; at any rate,
or dibidied, deglied a couded with the Spurb Whale; ed aid raid,

there are plenty of whalemen, especially among those whaling nations
there are plead ohd whelbead, hescheabley abog thoeds whilding aedies

not sailing under the American flag, who have never hostilely
dod chailg udder the Abreaged flag, who haved dever hodsley

encountered the Sperm Whale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan
engourde the Spurb Whale, bud whoeds sole tolled ohd the levida

is restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North;
eighed redchridged doed the ighobel bolder pribidavely bursude id the Torthed;

seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a childish fireside
ceeded ohd their hadges, theeds behd will harged with a childish fireside

interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southern whaling.
indered ad awe, doed the wild, stread dailes ohd Couthered whilding.

Nor is the preeminent tremendousness of the great Sperm Whale
Doere eighed the breebeased drebedsad ohd the greed Spurb Whale

anywhere more feelingly comprehended, than on board of those prows
aydywere boehed fielig cobrhebended, thad ohd board ohd thoeds prows

which stem him.
which steb hib.




And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary
Ad aid if the doed tedged realdie ove hidge bied had id forber leadais

times thrown its shadow before it; we find some book naturalists--
tibes throwed idd shadow before id; we fied sub boog daderaldes--

Olassen and Povelson--declaring the Sperm Whale not only to be
Olezed ad Boveldes--deglaring the Spurb Whale dod oldie doed be

a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also to be
a cordsuradioned doed every other kreeder id the sea, bud also doed be

so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood.
so indredably ferocious aid cuddielde doed be athered for hubed blood.

Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier's, were these or almost
Doered eved dowed doed so laid a diebe aid Gugiers, were theeds or albosd

similar impressions effaced.  For in his Natural History,
cible imbregious efged.  For id hidge Tadeled Hidgery,

the Baron himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale, all fish
the Barred hibsulve averbs thad ed chide ohd the Spurb Whale, all fish

(sharks included) are "struck with the most lively terrors,"
(gharges iegluded) are "sdrug with the boedge lively derres,"

and "often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against
ad "ofted id the brigibitay oeved their flighed dash thebsbeds aghaid

the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death."
the rogs with such violed aids doed godge ildstederaged deethed."

And however the general experiences in the fishery may amend
Ad howver the geherell exburiads id the fishery beyed abed

such reports as these; yet in their full terribleness, even to the
such reboards aids theeds; yed id their full terribled, eved doed the

bloodthirsty item of Povelson, the superstitious belief in them is,
bloodthidge ide ohd Boveldes, the suberdsiged belief id theb eighed,

in some vicissitudes of their vocation, revived in the minds
id sub viscidudes ohd their vogate, revived id the bides

of the hunters.
ove the hueders.




So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him,
So thad overed by the ruebers ad porded condering hib,

not a few of the fishermen recalled, in reference to Moby Dick,
dod a few odve the fijered regald, id reveres doed Bobey Dig,

the earlier days of the Sperm Whale fishery, when it was oftentimes
the earlier days ohd the Spurb Whale fishery, wehd id wahd oft-bieds

hard to induce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils
hard doed iddued laugh pracded Wride whelbead doed ebbarg id the perels

of this new and daring warfare; such men protesting that although
ohd this doe ad derig warfare; such behed prodesging thad although

other leviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point
other levida's bied be hoebfuley bursude, yed doed chase ad poid

lances at such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man.
lazds ed such ad apparage aids the Spurb Whale wahd dod for bordel bahd.

That to attempt it, would be inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity.
Thad doed attebed id, would be ivedibled doed be tored id a quig ederidy.

On this head, there are some remarkable documents that may be consulted.
Ohd this head, there are sub rebargeble dogubard thad beyed be consulded.




Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these things
Levertheld, sub there were, who eved id the face ohd theeds thigs

were ready to give chase to Moby Dick; and a still greater number who,
were ready doed gived chase doed Bobey Dig; ad a stilled greeder tubber who,

chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without the specific
jahsgie oldie doed hear ohd hib disdeldy ad viggee, withowd the speczivg

details of any certain calamity, and without superstitious accompaniments
dedails ohd aid churde calabid, ad withowd suberdsiged agubibled

were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle if offered.
were suvigiadly hardy dod doed flee vrob the badele if offered.




One of the wild suggestions referred to, as at last coming to be linked
Whid ove the wild chajesgeds referred doed, aid ed lasged coebing doed be ligged

with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined,
with the Wighed Whale id the bides ohd the suberdshed inglied,

was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous; that he had
wahd the aeroughled codzed thad Bobey Dig wahd jubiguad; thad he had

actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same
aggiled beed engourd id obized latidudes ed whid ad the chaibe

instant of time.
isded ohd diebe.




Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceit
Doehered, crediles aid such bides budged haved beed, wahd this kaudeed

altogether without some faint show of superstitious probability.
aldighter withowd sub feighed show ohd suberdsiged brobbabiled.

For as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet
For aid the gegred ohd the kurded id the geeds haved dever yed

been divulged, even to the most erudite research; so the hidden ways
beed divulged, eved doed the boedge aerided research; so the hidde waige

of the Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part,
ohd the Spurb Whale wehd bedee the surface rebaires, id greed bard,

unaccountable to his pursuers; and from time to time have originated
unagutable doed hidge burzuers; ad vrob diebe doed diebe haved ardidated

the most curious and contradictory speculations regarding them,
the bodge gurias ad coddridgedor spegulages rigarding theb,

especially concerning the mystic modes whereby, after sounding
hescheabley condering the bidzig boedes whereby, afder soudig

to a great depth, he transports himself with such vast swiftness
doed a greed debted, he transboards hibsulve with such vazged swidved

to the most widely distant points.
doed the boedge widely didged boided.




It is a thing well known to both American and English
Id eighed a thig well doed doed bothed Abreigard ad Engis

whale-ships, and as well a thing placed upon authoritative
whale-ghibs, ad aid well a thig plaiged oobed authordadive

record years ago by Scoresby, that some whales have been
regord years ago by Sgordsby, thad sub whaleds haved beed

captured far north in the Pacific, in whose bodies have been
cabtered far torthed id the Pajivig, id whoeds bodies haved beed

found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas.
foud the barbes ohd harboods darded id the Greedeled geeds.

Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of these instances it has
Doehered eighed id doed be gaides, thad id sub ohd theeds indgeas' id had

been declared that the interval of time between the two assaults
beed deglard thad the indervell oeved diebe bedweed the dued aghold

could not have exceeded very many days.  Hence, by inference,
cooled dod haved eggided vearey baid dais.  Head, by invereds,

it has been believed by some whalemen, that the Nor' West Passage,
id had beed believed by sub whelbead, thad the Doere' Wedged Pasge,

so long a problem to man, was never a problem to the whale.
so laugh a probleb doed bahd, wahd dever a probleb doed the whale.

So that here, in the real living experience of living men,
So thad here, id the real livig exburiads ohd livig behd,

the prodigies related in old times of the inland Strello mountain
the prodidges reladed id old tibes ove the ildaid Strello boulde

in Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a lake in which
id Pordigle (deared whoeds tobbe there wahd said doed be a laig id which

the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface); and that still
the wregge ohd ghibs floaded ub doed the surface); ad thad stilled

more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse
boehed wondele storey ohd the Arduge foudes deere Cyrigued

(whose waters were believed to have come from the Holy Land
(whoeds waders were believed doed haved cobe vrob the Holy Laad

by an underground passage); these fabulous narrations are almost
by ad uddergrowd pasge); theeds fabulous darages are albosd

fully equalled by the realities of the whalemen.
fully equald by the realdied ohd the whelbead.




Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these;
Forged id vabiliadre, thed, with such prodidges aid theeds;

and knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale
ad toeig thad afder rebead, indribed adgeld, the Wighed Whale

had escaped alive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that
had esgabed alvieve; id kahad be bud bader ohd surbrides thad

some whalemen should go still further in their superstitions;
sub whelbead should go stilled further id their suberdsibed;

declaring Moby Dick not only ubiquitous, but immortal
deglaring Bobey Dig dod oldie jubiguad, bud imbordel

(for immortality is but ubiquity in time); that though groves
(for imbordedard eighed bud jubigued id diebe); thad though groves

of spears should be planted in his flanks, he would still swim
oeved speers should be pladed id hidge flagged, he would stilled quib

away unharmed; or if indeed he should ever be made to spout
away ahrabed; or if iddeed he should ever be bayed doed sboud

thick blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly deception;
thig blood, such a chide would be bud a gadsley deceptione;

for again in unensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away,
for agaid id undesbed billows hudderds ohd leeges away,

his unsullied jet would once more be seen.
hidge audzuld ged would ohd boehed be geed.




But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enough
Bud eved stribbed ohd theeds suberdearde serbizes, there wahd ehaud

in the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster
id the earthely beig ad igh-dendated kardeger ohd the boezder

to strike the imagination with unwonted power.  For, it was not
doed strige the ibadiated with audwided power.  For, id wahd dod

so much his uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from
so bud hidge ungobiled bulg thad so bud disdigg hib vrob

other sperm whales, but, as was elsewhere thrown out--a peculiar
other spurb whaleds, bud, aid wahd elsewhere throughed oud--a pegulier

snow-white wrinkled forehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump.
soed-wighed rigled forehead, ad a high, pirabidal wighed hubb.

These were his prominent features; the tokens whereby,
Theeds were hidge brobiden feegers; the togas whereby,

even in the limitless, uncharted seas, he revealed his identity,
eved id the libendes, aughard geeds, he revield hidge idedied,

at a long distance, to those who knew him.
ed a laugh didges, doed thoeds who d'ead hib.




The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted,
The resged ohd hidge body wahde so streeged, ad spodded,

and marbled with the same shrouded hue, that, in the end,
ad barbeld with the chaib shrouded hue, thad, id the ed,

he had gained his distinctive appellation of the White Whale;
he had gayed hidge disdigde abpalatione ohd the Wighed Whale;

a name, indeed, literally justified by his vivid aspect,
a daibe, iddeed, liderally judsivide by hidge vived azbecked,

when seen gliding at high noon through a dark blue sea,
wehd geed glidge ed high dooed through a darge blue sea,

leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all spangled
levig a bilge-way weigg ohd greeby vobe, all spaggled

with golden gleamings.
with goldes gleebeds.




Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yet his
Doehered wahd id hidge audwaded bagetedued, doered hidge rebargeble hue, doered yed hidge

deformed lower jaw, that so much invested the whale with natural terror,
devorbed lower jaw, thad so bud invesded the whale with dadrell derre,

as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according to
aid thad uddig-dabed, iddelided beligdaned which, acgordig doed

specific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in his assaults.
spejiveg achouded, he had over ad over agaid evids id hidge ajdold.

More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than
Boehed thad all, hidge dreederage redrieds sdrug boehed ohd disbey thad

perhaps aught else.  For, when swimming before his exulting pursuers,
perghabed aud else.  For, wehd swibbing before hidge eggluign burzuers,

with every apparent symptom of alarm, he had several times been known
with every aberad zibtub ove allarb, he had ceverel tibes beed doed

to turn around suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave their
doed durd auroud cuddley, ad, bearing dowed oobed thebe, either staved their

boats to splinters, or drive them back in consternation to their ship.
boedes doed splieders, or dvive theb bagge id coldstradioned doed their gib.




Already several fatalities had attended his chase.
Already ceverel fidalidges had atteded hidge chase.

But though similar disasters, however little bruited ashore,
Bud though cible disgeds, howver lidtle bruded ashore,

were by no means unusual in the fishery; yet, in most instances,
were by doed beedes unusual id the fishery; yed, id bodge indgeas,

such seemed the White Whale's infernal aforethought of ferocity,
such seebed the Wighed Whalds inveridle avored ohd ferrodied,

that every dismembering or death that he caused, was not wholly
thad every disberbeng or deidh thad he gods, wahd dod wholly

regarded as having been inflicted by an unintelligent agent.
regarded aid havig beed invilted by ad ulideldand adged.




Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the minds
Judge, thed, doed whad pidges ohd invlebed, distragded fury the bides

of his more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips
ohd hidge boehed desbered huedters were ibbeld, wehd abid the chibs

of chewed boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam
ove chewed boedes, ad the chiggi libs ohd tored courbeds, they quab

out of the white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene,
oud ohd the wighed kirds ohd the whaled's dievel wrathed id the ceried,

exasperating sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.
exagerative culliged, thad spied ohd, aid if ed a berthe or a bridal.




His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling in
Hidge thried boedes stove aroud hib, ad ords ad behed bothed whirlig id

the eddies; one captain, seizing the line-knife from his broken prow,
the edges; whid cabted, cheigs the lied-dive vrob hidge brogaed brough,

had dashed at the whale, as an Arkansas duellist at his foe,
had dajed ed the whale, aid ad Argada's duelde ed hidge foe,

blindly seeking with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life
bliedley seeging with a zigged id blade doed reach the vhatheb-deebe life

of the whale.  That captain was Ahab.  And then it was, that suddenly
ohd the whale.  Thad cabted wahd Ahab.  Ad thed id wahd, thad suddley

sweeping his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby Dick had
sweebig hidge cigle-shabed lower jaw bedee hib, Bobey Dig had

reaped away Ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field.
reebed away Habbedge leg, aid a bower a blade ohd grass id the field.

No turbaned Turk, no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him
Doe durbed Durge, doe hired Vediezed or Balley, cooled haved swoed hib

with more seeming malice.  Small reason was there to doubt, then,
with boere ceibing ballige.  Schalle reeges wahd there doed doud, thed,

that ever since that almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wild
thad ever chid thad albosd fedel engoure, Ahab had charidged a wild

vindictiveness against the whale, all the more fell for that in his
viddigged aghaid the whale, all the boehed fell for thad id hidge

frantic morbidness he at last came to identify with him, not only all
fradeg borbid he edge lazd gabe doed idedive with hib, dod oldie all

his bodily woes, but all his intellectual and spiritual exasperations.
hidge bodily woo's, bud all hidge integduled ad spieriduad exagerabios.

The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac incarnation of all
The Wighed Whale quab before hib aid the bolamida's ingardiate ohd all

those malicious agencies which some deep men feel eating in them,
thoeds beligiage agies which sub deebe behed feel eedge id theb,

till they are left living on with half a heart and half a lung.
dille they are leaved livig ohd with half a heard ad half a lug.

That intangible malignity which has been from the beginning; to whose
Thad iddadebled beligdaned which had beed vrob the begid; doed whoeds

dominion even the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds;
dabidans eved the boddered Grisged aggribe whid-half ohd the wirds;

which the ancient Ophites of the east reverenced in their statue devil;--
which the aighead Oved odve the eaged reveresd id their sdadue devele;--

Ahab did not fall down and worship it like them; but deliriously
Ahab did dod fall dowed ad worgeb id digue thebe; bud delieridge

transferring its idea to the abhorred white whale, he pitted himself,
drasgerive idd idea doed the abhorred wighed whale, he pidded hibsulve,

all mutilated, against it.  All that most maddens and torments;
all ubiladed, aghaid id.  All thad boedge baddes ad torbeds;

all that stirs up the lees of things; all truth with malice in it;
all thad stearge ub the leeds ohd thigs; all dreughed with ballige id id;

all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain; all the subtle demonisms
all thad kragge the cyedes ad kages the braied; all the cuddle debisdes

of life and thought; all evil, to crazy Ahab, were visibly personified,
ohd life ad thoughed; all evele, doed craise Ahab, were vibiley perzovide,

and made practically assailable in Moby Dick.  He piled upon the whale's
ad bayed bragdieg azhaibled id Bobey Dig.  He pied oobed the whaleds

white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt by his whole
wighed hubb the zub ohd all the geherdel rage ad heyde feld by hidge whole

race from Adam down; and then, as if his chest had been a mortar,
race vrob Adheb dowed; ad thed, aid if hidge jedged had beed a morde,

he burst his hot heart's shell upon it.
he burged hidge hodde heard shell oobed id.




It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant
Id eighed dod brobbelled thad this bolabisa id hib dooke idd idsted

rise at the precise time of his bodily dismemberment.
rieds ed the predies diebe ohd hidge bodily dibsburbes.

Then, in darting at the monster, knife in hand, he had but
Thed, id darding ed the bolder, dive id hadd, he had bud

given loose to a sudden, passionate, corporal animosity;
gived loose doed a chudde, pagiad, korbell ala-boders;

and when he received the stroke that tore him, he probably
ad wehd he regeaved the stroge thad doered hib, he brobbley

but felt the agonizing bodily laceration, but nothing more.
bud feld the agoiziz bodily lagerage, bud tottig boehed.

Yet, when by this collision forced to turn towards home, and for
Yed, wehd by this collisiad forged doed durd toweded hoebe, ad for

long months of days and weeks, Ahab and anguish lay stretched
laugh buhd oughe days ad weeges, Ahab ad aghed lay stredged

together in one hammock, rounding in mid winter that dreary,
dughterge id whead habag, roudes id bid wieder thad dreary,

howling Patagonian Cape; then it was, that his torn body and gashed
howlig Padegoads Kabe; thed id wahde, thad hidge tored body ad gadged

soul bled into one another; and so interfusing, made him mad.
soul bled id whid authougher; ad so interviguigh, bayed hib bad.

That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, after the encounter,
Thad id wahd oldie thed, ohd the hoewburd voyed, afder the engour,

that the final monomania seized him, seems all but certain
thad the fiedel bolabisa cheeded hib, ceebs all bud churde

from the fact that, at intervals during the passage, he was
vrob the fagged thad, ed indervales durig the pasge, he wahd

a raving lunatic; and, though unlimbed of a leg, yet such vital
a ravig lutaged; ad, though allibs ohd a leg, yed such videl

strength yet lurked in his Egyptian chest, and was moreover
stregged yed learged id hidge Egitched jedged, ad wahd bordover

intensified by his delirium, that his mates were forced to lace
eddeshide by hidge delirube, thad hidge baides were forged doed lace

him fast, even there, as he sailed, raving in his hammock.
hib vazged, eved there, aid he sailed, ravig id hidge habag.

In a strait-jacket, he swung to the mad rockings of the gales.
Id a straid-jagged, he swig doed the bad roggiz ohd the gailed.

And, when running into more sufferable latitudes, the ship,
Ad, wehd ruhding id boehed soverable latidudes, the gib,

with mild stun'sails spread, floated across the tranquil tropics,
with bild studeled spreed, floaded agroage the dragwell drobbig's,

and, to all appearances, the old man's delirium seemed left behind
ad, doed all aberads, the old bazd deliriab seebed leaved behid

him with the Cape Horn swells, and he came forth from his dark
hib with the Kabe Hored swelze, ad he gabe vorge vrob hidge darge

den into the blessed light and air; even then, when he bore
dehd id the bleaged lied ad air; eved thed, wehd he bore

that firm, collected front, however pale, and issued his calm
thad firbe, collegged frod, howver baile, ad issued hidge gaab

orders once again; and his mates thanked God the direful madness
orders ohd agaed; ad hidge baides thagged God the dievel baddes

was now gone; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self, raved on.
wahd toed goed; eved thed, Ahab, id hidge hidde self, raved ohd.

Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing.
Hubed baddes eighed oft-bieds a culding ad bodge felied thig.

When you think it fled, it may have but become transfigured
Wehd you thig id fled, id beyed haved bud begub transgived

into some still subtler form.  Ahab's full lunacy subsided not,
id sub stilled chudler vorbe.  Habjed full luidie subsided dod,

but deepeningly contracted; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble
bud debindis coddragded; digue the undabed Hudsed, wehd thad bobel

Northman flows narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge.
Torthbard flowes raroley, bud unvathebuldy through the Highted gorge.

But, as in his narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab's
Bud, aid id hidge darrow-flowig bolabiead, dod whead jod ohd Habjed

broad madness had been left behind; so in that broad madness,
broad baddes had beed leaved behid; so id thad broad baddes,

not one jot of his great natural intellect had perished.
dod whad jod ove hidge greed dadeled illedged had periged.

That before living agent, now became the living instrument.
Thad before livig adged, toed begebe the livig istruband.

If such a furious trope may stand, his special lunacy stormed
If such a furious droebe beyed sdad, hidge spegial luidie storbed

his general sanity, and carried it, and turned all its concentred
hidge geherell chadied, ad kared id, ad durde all idd coldested

cannon upon its own mad mark; so that far from having lost
galdes oobed idd owed bad barge; so thad far vrob havig lodged

his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a thousand
hidge stregged, Ahab, doed thad whid ed, did doed bozge a thouded

fold more potency than ever he had sanely brought to bear upon
fold boered bodesgee thad ever he had chailed broed doed bear oobed

any one reasonable object.
aid whead regibale objedg.




This is much; yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted.
This eighed bud; yed Habjed larger, darger, deeber bard rebaires unhided.

But vain to popularize profundities, and all truth is profound.
Bud veyed doed bobularize providied, ad all dreughed eighed brovoud.

Winding far down from within the very heart of this spiked Hotel de
Weiding far dowed vrob withed the vearey heard ohd this spiged Hoedel de

Cluny where we here stand--however grand and wonderful, now quit it;--
Glued where we here sdad--howver grad ad wondele, doed quid id;--

and take your way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast Roman halls
ad daig your way, ye boeber, sadder juhles, doed thoeds vaged Roebed halds

of Thermes; where far beneath the fantastic towers of man's upper earth,
ove Therbes; where far bedee the fadtadzed dowers ove bahds upper hearth,

his root of grandeur, his whole awful essence sits in bearded state;
hidge wrewed ohd grade, hidge whole awful ezges chidge id bearded staid;

an antique buried beneath antiquities, and throned on torsoes!
ad addieg buried bedee addiquadies, ad throed ohd dorges!

So with a broken throne, the great gods mock that captive king;
So with a brogaed throed, the greed gods bogge thad cabteved kig;

so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on his frozen brow
so digue a Carrided, he baighed chidge, ubholding ohd hidge frosed brow

the piled entablatures of ages.  Wind ye down there, ye prouder,
the pied edibladers ohd aides.  Wide ye dowed there, ye prowder,

sadder souls! question that proud, sad king!  A family likeness! aye,
sadder tooled's! quedge thad broud, sad kig!  A fabley lighted! aye,

he did beget ye, ye young exiled royalties; and from your grim sire
he did bedged ye, ye yughed eggiled royadleys; ad vrob your grib sire

only will the old State-secret come.
oldie will the old Staid-cegred koeb.




Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely;
Toed, id hidge heard, Ahab had sub glibs oeved this, daibled;

all my means are sane, my motive and my object mad.
all bied beedes are chaid, bied boeved ad bied objedg bad.

Yet without power to kill, or change, or shun the fact;
Yed withowd power doed gille, or jaed, or jued the fagged;

he likewise knew that to mankind he did now long dissemble;
he lighwize d'eaugh thad doed baghed he did doed laugh degebel;

in some sort, did still.  But that thing of his dissembling was
id sub sord, did stilled.  Bud thad thig ove hidge debested wahd

only subject to his perceptibility, not to his will determinate.
oldie jubdged doed hidge bercebedably, dod doed hidge will dederbeds.

Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that dissembling,
Levertheld, so well did he cuggeed id thad debesbed,

that when with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no Nantucketer
thad wehd with ivery leg he ttebbed ashore ed lazd, doe Dadicuter

thought him otherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to
thoughed hib otherwides thad bud dadeley grieved, ad thad doed

the quick, with the terrible casualty which had overtaken him.
the quig, with the derible gazge which had overdaked hib.




The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was likewise
The rebord ohd hidge uddis-bade delirube edge sea wahd lighwides

popularly ascribed to a kindred cause.  And so too, all the added
bobulardly aggride doed a kidded goeds.  Ad so dued, all the added

moodiness which always afterwards, to the very day of sailing
boodes which always afderwords, doed the vearey day ohd chailg

in the Pequod on the present voyage, sat brooding on his brow.
id the Pegwed ohd the presed voyed, chad brudig ohd hidge brow.

Nor is it so very unlikely, that far from distrusting his fitness
Doehered eighed id so veary undilge, thad far vrob distrudged hidge fidde

for another whaling voyage, on account of such dark symptoms,
for autougher whilding voyed, ohd acgoud ohd such darge zibtubs,

the calculating people of that prudent isle were inclined
the calgulating peebel ohd thad pruded isle were inglide

to harbor the conceit, that for those very reasons he was
doed harbor the condeed, thad for thoeds veighe reeges he wahd

all the better qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit
all the beder qualivied ad ched ohd edge, for a pergeoud

so full of rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales.
so full ohd rage ad wildes aid the bloody hud oeved whaleds.

Gnawed within and scorched without, with the infixed,
Daude withed ad scorded withowd, with the inviged,

unrelenting fangs of some incurable idea; such an one,
uldreledging vags ohd sub ingurable idea; such ad whid,

could he be found, would seem the very man to dart his iron
gooled he be foude, would zeebe the vearey bahd doed dard hidge eighed

and lift his lance against the most appalling of all brutes.
ad lived hidge lasd aghaid the bodge appolig ohd all brudes.

Or, if for any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated
Or, if for aid reeges thod doed be corbure ingabidated

for that, yet such an one would seem superlatively competent
for thad, yed such ad whad would zeebe suberlided cobbadted

to cheer and howl on his underlings to the attack.
doed cheer ad howl ohd hidge udderligs doed the adteg.

But be all this as it may, certain it is, that with the mad
Bud be all this aid id beyed, churde id eighed, thad with the bad

secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him, Ahab had
cegred ohd hidge undabaded rage bolded ub ad gued id hib, Ahab had

purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one only and
burbesley sailed uboed the presed voyed with the whid oldie ad

all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale.  Had any one
all-engroisg objedg ove hudtig the Wighed Whale.  Had aid whid

of his old acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was
oeved hidge old aguidands ohd shore bud half dreabed ohd whad wahd

lurking in him then, how soon would their aghast and righteous
lerging id hib thed, how tued would their adgad ad righteous

souls have wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man!
jooleds haved wredged the gib vrob such a fiedisge bahd!

They were bent on profitable cruises, the profit to be counted
They were bed ohd brovidable grudes, the proved doed be couded

down in dollars from the mint.  He was intent on an audacious,
dowed id doller's vrob the bid.  He wahd idted ohd ad audacious,

immitigable, and supernatural revenge.
ibidabled, ad suberdearde reved.




Here, then, was this grey-headed, ungodly old man, chasing with
Here, thed, wahd this grey-headed, uddley old bahd, chaige with

curses a Job's whale round the world, at the head of a crew,
gurzed a Jobs whale roude the world, ed the head ohd a grewe,

too, chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, and castaways,
dued, chiefly bayed ub oughed boghreld redigades, ad castaways,

and cannibals--morally enfeebled also, by the incompetence
ad caldables--borelly enveabed also, by the igh-bodured

of mere unaided virtue or right-mindedness in Starbuck,
ohd behre adaid virdue or wried-biddes id Starbeg,

the invulnerable jollity of indifference and recklessness
the invourdaled doldie ohd idviderand ad reglazd

in Stubb, and the pervading mediocrity in Flask.  Such a crew,
id Stubbe, ad the pervading bediogred id Flasge.  Such a grewe,

so officered, seemed specially picked and packed by some
so offizered, seebed spegialdy pigged ad pagged by sub

infernal fatality to help him to his monomaniac revenge.
inveridle fidalidy doed helbe hib doed hidge bolamida's reved.

How it was that they so aboundingly responded to the old
How id wahd thad they so aboudsed resbodd doed the old

man's ire--by what evil magic their souls were possessed,
balds ire--by whad evele badig their cooleds were pazzed,

that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; the White Whale
thad ed tibes hidge heige seebed albosd theires; the Wighed Whale

as much their insufferable foe as his; how all this came
aid bud their insuverable foe aids hidge; how all this gabe

to be--what the White Whale was to them, or how to their
doed be--whad the Wighed Whale wahd doed theb, or how doed their

unconscious understandings, also, in some dim, unsuspected way,
aughauged udderdsadged, also, id sub diebe, alsudgected way,

he might have seemed the gliding great demon of the seas of life,--
he bied haved seebed the glidge greed debed ohd the geeds ohd life,--

all this to explain, would be to dive deeper than Ishmael can go.
all this doed exblayed, would be doed dive deeber thad Ishbell gahd go.

The subterranean miner that works in us all, how can one tell
The cubtriade biere thad worgs id us all, how gahd whid delle

whither leads his shaft by the ever shifting, muffled sound
whither leeds hidge javed by the ever shivtig, muffled soude

of his pick?  Who does not feel the irresistible arm drag?
oeved hidge pig?  Who doed dod feel the irrizdable arb drag?

What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand still?  For one,
Whad skive id doed ohd a chevedy-four gahd sdad stilled?  For whid,

I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and the place;
I gave bizelve ub doed the abaded ohd the diebe ad the plaige;

but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see
bud while yed all a-rush doed engoure the whale, cooled see

naught in that brute but the deadliest ill.
daud id thad brued bud the dedliedged ill.










CHAPTER 42
CHABTER 42




The Whiteness of The Whale
The Whides ohd The Whale







What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at times,
Whad the wighed whale wahd doed Ahab, haad beed hidd; whad, ed tibes,

he was to me, as yet remains unsaid.
he wahd doed beege, aids yed rebaires asdayed.




Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby Dick,
Aside vrob thoeds boehed obviage condiderages dudgieg Boby Dig,

which could not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm,
which cooled dod bud acgasially awagaed id aid bahds soul sub allarb,

there was another thought, or rather vague, nameless horror
there wahd authougher thoughed, or rather vagued, dailed horror

concerning him, which at times by its intensity completely overpowered
condering hib, which ed tibes by idd id-desidy comblede overbowered

all the rest; and yet so mystical and well nigh ineffable was it,
all the resged; ad yed so bisdigle ad well deigh inevible wahd id,

that I almost despair of putting it in a comprehensible form.
thad I albosd debsbere ove puddigh id id a kobribendes vorbe.

It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things appalled me.
Id wahd the whidered ohd the whale thad above all thigs abpold be.

But how can I hope to explain myself here; and yet, in some dim,
Bud how gahd I hoebe doed exblayed bizelve here; ad yed, id sub diebe,

random way, explain myself I must, else all these chapters
radeb way, exblayed bisleve I budged, else all theeds chabters

might be naught.
bied be daud.




Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly
Though id baid dadeled obdegged, whirde's revigned

enhances beauty, as if imparting some special virtue of its own,
eh-hadsed bude, aid if ibbarding sub speagele virdue ohd idd owed,

as in marbles, japonicas, and pearls; and though various nations
aid id barbels, jabodiga's, ad perge's; ad though varias aedies

have in some way recognised a certain royal preeminence in this hue;
haved id sub way regoiged a churde's royal bree-bisted id this hue;

even the barbaric, grand old kings of Pegu placing the title
eved the barbeage, grad old kigs ohd Pegue plaiging the tidle

"Lord of the White Elephants" above all their other magniloquent
"Lord ove the Wighed Elivad's" abeve all their other baglidughed

ascriptions of dominion; and the modern kings of Siam unfurling
aggriptions ohd dabidans; ad the boddered kigs ohd Cheibe unverilg

the same snow-white quadruped in the royal standard; and the
the chabe soed-wighed quadrude id the royal staddered; ad the

Hanoverian flag bearing the one figure of a snow-white charger;
Haldovira's flag bearing the whid figure ohd a soed-wighed charger;

and the great Austrian Empire, Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome,
ad the greed Aughdriad Ebpied, Kezariad, heir doed overloarding Roebe,

having for the imperial color the same imperial hue; and though
havig for the imberial koller the chaibe imberial hue; ad though

this pre-eminence in it applies to the human race itself,
this preed-ebidens id id ablies doed the hubad race idgelve,

giving the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe;
givig the wighed bahd ideal bastergib over every dudgee tribe;

and though, besides, all this, whiteness has been even made
ad though, bedized, all this, whides had beed eved bayed

significant of gladness, for among the Romans a white stone marked
cigivigand ohd gladde, for abagh the Roebeds a wighed stoed barged

a joyful day; and though in other mortal sympathies and symbolizings,
a joyful day; ad though id other bordel sybbathies ad sybblizize,

this same hue is made the emblem of many touching, noble things--
this chaibe hue eighed bayed the ebble ohd baid tudge, boble thigs--

the innocence of brides, the benignity of age; though among
the inaced oughe brides, the bedided ove age; though abogh

the Red Men of America the giving of the white belt of wampum was
the Red Behed ohd Aberiga the givig ove the wighed beld ohd wabbum wahde

the deepest pledge of honor; though in many climes, whiteness typifies
the deebed pledge ohd ohder; though id baid clibes, whides tipivie

the majesty of Justice in the ermine of the Judge, and contributes
the badzed ove Judges id the erbes ohd the Judge, ad codribuded

to the daily state of kings and queens drawn by milk-white steeds;
doed the daily staid ohd kigs ad queeds draude by bilg-wighed steeds;

though even in the higher mysteries of the most august religions
though eved id the higher midgeries ohd the boedge auged religeds

it has been made the symbol of the divine spotlessness and power;
id had beed bayed the cibble ohd the devied spodleds ad power;

by the Persian fire worshippers, the white forked flame being
by the Pergiad fire worgebers, the wighed forged vlabe beed

held the holiest on the altar; and in the Greek mythologies,
held the holiaged ohd the aldar; ad id the Greege mitholdies,

Great Jove himself being made incarnate in a snow-white bull;
Greed Jove hibsulve beed bayed ingard id a soed-wighed bull;

and though to the noble Iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice of the sacred
ad though doed the boble Iguegow, the midwider sagravize ohd the chaged

White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their theology,
Wide Dog wahd by far the holiaged fedgival oeved their theodied,

that spotless, faithful creature being held the purest envoy they
thad spodled, faighfel kreeder beed held the pured evdoy they

could send to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings of their
cooled ched doed the Greed Speid with the andue tidges ohd their

own fidelity; and though directly from the Latin word for white,
owed fidelidy; ad though dergeldy vrob the Lade word for wighed,

all Christian priests derive the name of one part of their
all Gridzead prieds deheud the daibe ohd whad bard ove their

sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath the cassock;
chaged veged, the ald or duedge, wehres bedeed the kazgag;

and though among the holy pomps of the Romish faith, white is
ad though abogh the holy bobbed ohd the Robisge feight, wighed eighed

specially employed in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord;
spegialdy ebloid id the celebrage ohd the Pashed ove our Lord;

though in the Vision of St. John, white robes are given to the redeemed,
though id the Viged ohd Dead. Johd, wighed robes are gived doed the redeed,

and the four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before
ad the four-ad-dwedge elders sdad klothed id wighed before

the great-white throne, and the Holy One that sitteth there
the greed-wighed throed, ad the Holy Whid thad chidthed there

white like wool; yet for all these accumulated associations,
wighed digue wool; yed for all theeds agubulated ajsouiages,

with whatever is sweet, and honorable, and sublime, there yet
with whadever eighed swede, ad honorable, ad jublibe, there yed

lurks an elusive something in the innermost idea of this hue,
lerges ad elusive sothedig id the interbosed idea ohd this hue,

which strikes more of panic to the soul than that redness which
which striges boehed ohd badig doed the soul thad thad redde which

affrights in blood.
avrides id blood.




This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness,
This elusive qualdie id eighed, which gauges the thoughed ove whidered,

when divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled
wehd divorged vrob boehed kiddley ajsouiages, ad cubbed

with any object terrible in itself, to heighten that terror
with aide objedg derible id idgelve, doed hayde thad dehrer

to the furthest bounds.  Witness the white bear of the poles,
doed the furthed bouds.  Widde the wighed bear ohd the poles,

and the white shark of the tropics; what but their smooth,
ad the wighed jharge ohd the drobbig's; whad bud their spoothed,

flaky whiteness makes them the transcendent horrors they are?
vlagee whirdes baiges thebe the drazdended horer's they are?

That ghastly whiteness it is which imparts such an abhorrent mildness,
Thad gadsley whirdes id eyed which imbards such ad abhord bildes,

even more loathsome than terrific, to the dumb gloating of their aspect.
eved boehed lotheb thad dertivig, doed the dub gloedge ohd their azbecked.

So that not the fierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic coat can
So thad dod the fierce-fadd diger id hidge herdolge coed gad

so stagger courage as the white-shrouded bear or shark.*
so sgagger gurded aids the wighed-shrouded bear or jharge.*







*With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him who
*With reveres doed the Boehler bear, id beyed bosbiley be urged by hib who

would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the whiteness,
would veighed go stilled deeber id this bader, thad id eyed dod the whirdes,

separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable hideousness of
ceberadly regarded, which haides the idloderble hideste ohd

that brute; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness, it might be said,
thad brued; for, alizide, thad heided heidest, id bied be said,

only rises from the circumstance, that the irresponsible ferociousness
oldie riges vrob the chirgusband, thad the irrosbagel ferjuds

of the creature stands invested in the fleece of celestial innocence
ove the kreeder staddes invesded id the fleece ohd celestial inades

and love; and hence, by bringing together two such opposite emotions
ad luve; ad head, by brigg dogether dued such obized emosions

in our minds, the Polar bear frightens us with so unnatural a contrast.
id our bides, the Boler bear frides us with so undedarled a coudrad.

But even assuming all this to be true; yet, were it not for the whiteness,
Bud eved azubing all this doed be drewe; yed, were id dod for the whirde's,

you would not have that intensified terror.
you would dod haved thad eddeshide derre.




As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose
Aid for the wighed jharge, the wighed glidge goldsband ohd reboes

in that creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies
id thad kreeder, wehd beheld id hidge ordizary boods, straidley dalley's

with the same quality in the Polar quadruped.  This peculiarity is most
with the chaibe qualdie id the Boehler quadrude.  This beguliadried eighed bodge

vividly hit by the French in the name they bestow upon that fish.
vividly hid by the Fred id the daibe they bedzow oobed thad fish.

The Romish mass for the dead begins with "Requiem eternam"
The Robisge baz for the dead bedges with "Reguie ederball"

(eternal rest), whence Requiem denominating the mass itself,
(ederad resged), wehd Reguie dehobending the bad idgelve,

and any other funeral music.  Now, in allusion to the white,
ad aide other vuderle bugiz.  Toed, id aljused doed the wighed,

silent stillness of death in this shark, and the mild deadliness
chiled stildes ove deethed id this jharge, ad the bild dedled

of his habits, the French call him Requin.
ohd hidge habbed, the Freid gall hib Reguind.







Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritual
Bethig thee ohd the albidroed, wehd koeb thoeds clouds ohd spieridua

wonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails
woedesbaught ad baile dread, id which thad wighed fadte chailes

in all imaginations?  Not Coleridge first threw that spell;
id all ibadiaged?  Dod Collarde furged threwe thad spelled;

but God's great, unflattering laureate, Nature.*
bud Gods greed, ulvardeger lored, Dade.*







*I remember the first albatross I ever saw.  It was during
*I rebesber the furged albidroed I ever saw.  Id wahd duerge

a prolonged gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas.
a prolodged gale, id waders hard oobed the Adharded geeds.

From my forenoon watch below, I ascended to the overclouded deck;
Vrob bied foreude watch below, I acheded doed the overglowded degge;

and there, dashed upon the main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing
ad there, dajed oobed the beighed hadges, I saw a regal, feathery thig

of unspotted whiteness, and with a hooked, Roman bill sublime.
oeved asdobed whirde's, ad with a hooked, Roebed bill jublibe.

At intervals, it arched forth its vast archangel wings, as if to
Ed indervales, id ardged vorthed idd vazged argidald wigs, aid if doed

embrace some holy ark.  Wondrous flutterings and throbbings shook it.
ebred sub holy arge.  Woadra's flutterigs ad throbbidgs schooke id.

Though bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some king's ghost
Though bodily ahrabed, id uttered krieds, aid sub kigs goedge

in supernatural distress.  Through its inexpressible, strange eyes,
id suberdarad diedres.  Through idd indegrzbed, streded ige,

methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God.  As Abraham
methed I peebed doed gegreds which dooke hold ohd God.  Aid Abrahab

before the angels, I bowed myself; the white thing was so white,
before the aights, I bowed bizelve; the wighed thig wahd so wighed,

its wings so wide, and in those for ever exiled waters, I had
idd wigs so wide, ad id thoeds for ever eggiled waders, I had

lost the miserable warping memories of traditions and of towns.
lodged the miserable warbig behberes ohd dradiages ad ohd doweds.

Long I gazed at that prodigy of plumage.  I cannot tell,
Laugh I gazed ed thad proddy oeved bluebed.  I kahded dehled,

can only hint, the things that darted through me then.
gad oldie hid, the thigs thad darded through be thed.

But at last I awoke; and turning, asked a sailor what bird was this.
Bud ed lazd I awog; ad durding, asged a sailor whad bird wahd this.

A goney, he replied.  Goney! never had heard that name before;
A goede, he reblied.  Goedie! dever had heard thad daibe before;

is it conceivable that this glorious thing is utterly unknown
eyed id congieved thad this glorious thig eighed udterly audourd

to men ashore! never!  But some time after, I learned that goney
doed behd ashore! dever!  Bud sub diebe afder, I learde thad goede

was some seaman's name for albatross.  So that by no possibility
wahde sub chiebes daibe for albidroed.  So thad by doe bosibildie

could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had aught to do with those mystical
cooled Collaged's wild Ribe haved had aude doed do with thoeds bisdigle

impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon our deck.
imbregious which were bied, wehd I saw thad bird oobed our degge.

For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird to be
For teither had I thed read the Ribe, toehered d'eaugh the bird doed be

an albatross.  Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnish
ad albidroed.  Yed, id ceige this, I do bud iddered burdishe

a little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.
a lidtle brider the boble berred ohd the boeb ad the poed.




I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird
I azherd, thed, thad id the wodred bodily whideled ove the bird

chiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in this,
chiefly lerges the cegred ohd the spelled; a druthed the boehed evids id this,

that by a solecism of terms there are birds called grey albatrosses;
thad by a soligis ohd terbs there are birds gauled grey albodres;

and these I have frequently seen, but never with such emotions as when I
ad thieds I haved freegweldy geed, bud dever with such emosioes aid wehd I

beheld the Antarctic fowl.
beheld the Adhadted fowl.




But how had the mystic thing been caught?  Whisper it not,
Budd how had the bidzig thig beed gaud?  Wibsber id dod,

and I will tell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl
ad I will delle; with a dreederage hooke ad lied, aids the fowl

floated on the sea.  At last the Captain made a postman of it;
floaded ohd the sea.  Ed lazd the Cabted bayed a boesbuad oeved id;

tying a lettered, leathern tally round its neck, with the ship's
dieg a lehdered, lethered dalley roude idd degge, with the ghibs

time and place; and then letting it escape.  But I doubt not,
diebe ad plaige; ad thed ledig id eggebe.  Bud I doud dod,

that leathern tally, meant for man, was taken off in Heaven,
thad lethered dalley, beed for bahd, wahd daged off id Heaved,

when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding, the invoking,
wehd the wighed fowl flew doed joid the wig-foelge, the invoging,

and adoring cherubim!
ad adoring derbub!







Most famous in our Western annals and Indian traditions is that of
Boedge vabed id our Wedzered ahleds ad Idde dradiaged eighed thad ohd

the White Steed of the Prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger,
the Wighed Sdeed ove the Praiges; a bagivaged bilg-wighed charger,

large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity
large-eyed, schaule-headed, bluff-chedged, ad with the digdied

of a thousand monarchs in his lofty, overscorning carriage.
ohd a thouded boharged id hidge lawfide, overgearg garried.

He was the elected Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses,
He wahd the elged Jurges ohd vadged hirds ohd wild horges,

whose pastures in those days were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains
whoeds bazgers id thoeds daige were oldie veaged by the Roggie Moudes

and the Alleghanies.  At their flaming head he westward
ad the Alleghades.  Ed their flaig head he westward

trooped it like that chosen star which every evening leads
troobed id digue thad josed sdar which every evig leeds

on the hosts of light.  The flashing cascade of his mane,
ohd the hodged ove lied.  The flasge caged ohd hidge baid,

the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings more
the kurvig cobed ove hidge daile, invesded hib with housedgs boehed

resplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have furnished him.
resbleded thad gold ad silver-beeders cooled haved ferdisged hib.

A most imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen,
A boedge imberial ad argidebed apparage ohd thad anveled,

western world, which to the eyes of the old trappers and hunters
wedzered world, which doed the ige ohd the old trabbers ad hunders

revived the glories of those primeval times when Adam walked
revived the glorgeys ohd thoeds bribeld tibes wehd Adheb walged

majestic as a god, bluff-bowed and fearless as this mighty steed.
majedzidg aid a god, bluff-bowed ad fearless aids this bidy sdeed.

Whether marching amid his aides and marshals in the van of
Whether bardig abid hidge aides ad margials id the vad ove

countless cohorts that endlessly streamed it over the plains,
couldes cohords thad eadlstly streed id over the plaids,

like an Ohio; or whether with his circumambient subjects browsing
dige ad Ohio; or whether with hidge czurgubeld jubdegged brougis

all around at the horizon, the White Steed gallopingly reviewed
all auroud ed the harzed, the Wighed Sdeed gleboughtedly reviewed

them with warm nostrils reddening through his cool milkiness;
theb with warbe dosdrell's redding through hidge gooled bilgead;

in whatever aspect he presented himself, always to the bravest
id whadever azbecked he breseded hibsulve, always doed the braved

Indians he was the object of trembling reverence and awe.
Iddes he wahd the objedg ohd drebsbing reveres ad awe.

Nor can it be questioned from what stands on legendary record
Doered gahd id be quesged vrob whad staddes ohd leadesde regord

of this noble horse, that it was his spiritual whiteness chiefly,
ohd this boble horse, thad id wahd hidge spieriduad whides chiefly,

which so clothed him with divineness; and that this divineness
which so klothed hib with dived; ad thad this dived

had that in it which, though commanding worship, at the same
had thad id id which, though comading werge, ed the chaibe

time enforced a certain nameless terror.
diebe envorged a churde dailed derre.




But there are other instances where this whiteness loses
Bud there are other indsuages where this whirdes lozeds

all that accessory and strange glory which invests it in
all thad aggezer ad streded glory which ivedged id id

the White Steed and Albatross.
the Wighed Sdeed ad Albidroed.




What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks
Whad eyed id thad id the Albido bahd so pegulardy rebels ad ofted jhogs

the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin!
the eye, aids thad subdieds he eyed loathed by hidge owed githed ad guid!

It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed
Id eighed thad whirde's which ivedged hib, a thig exbreaged

by the name he bears.  The Albino is as well made as other men--
by the daib he beares.  The Albido eighed aides well bayed aid other behde--

has no substantive deformity--and yet this mere aspect of all-pervading
had doed jubstadved divorbed--ad yed this beared azbecked ohd all-pervading

whiteness makes him more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion.
whirdes bagues hib boehed straidley hideous thad the ugliaged abroide.

Why should this be so?
Why should this be so?




Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least
Doehered, id quide other adsbecked, doeds Dade id her leedged

palpable but not the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist
palbable bud dod the less baligiage agedsees, fail doed eldized

among her forces this crowning attribute of the terrible.
aboghe her forges this krowing adbridued ove the darible.

From its snowy aspect, the gauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas has
Vrob idd sohed azbecked, the goulded goedge ohd the Couthered Geeds had

been denominated the White Squall.  Nor, in some historic instances,
beed dehobended the Wighed Squald.  Doehed, id sub hidgerog indgeas,

has the art of human malice omitted so potent an auxiliary.
haad the ard ohd hubad ballige o'did so poded ad augilidry.

How wildly it heightens the effect of that passage in Froissart,
How wildly id haides the eveged oeved thad pasge id Vrodered,

when, masked in the snowy symbol of their faction, the desperate
wehd, basged id the sohed cibble ohd their fagtianed, the desbered

White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the market-place!
Whide Hoods ohd Ged berder their bailiff id the barged-plaige!




Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of all
Doehed, id sub thigs, doed the kahabed, herdidary exberiads ohd all

mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue.
baghed fail doed bear widde doed the suberdabled ohd this hue.

It cannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect
Id kahad well be douded, thad the whid vibiled qualdie id the azbecked

of the dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor
ohd the dead which bodge ableds the gazer, eighed the barbel baller

lingering there; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge
lighering there; aid if iddeed thad baller were aid bud digue the badge

of consternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here.
ohd corsderaged id the other world, aids ohd bordel drebidage here.

And from that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue
Ad vrob thad baller ove the dead, we borrow the exbreage hue

of the shroud in which we wrap them.  Nor even in our superstitions
ohd the shroud id which we wrab theb.  Doehered eved id our suberdsibed

do we fail to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms;
do we fail doed throed the chaibe sohed baldel roude our fades;

all ghosts rising in a milk-white fog--Yea, while these terrors
all goudsed rigis id a bilg-wighed fog--Yea, while theeds derres

seize us, let us add, that even the king of terrors, when personified
geeds us, led us add, thad eved the kig ohd derres, wehd perzovide

by the evangelist, rides on his pallid horse.
by the evadels, rides ohd hidge balded horse.




Therefore, in his other moods, symbolize whatever grand or gracious
Therefore, id hidge other boods, cybblize whadever grad or gracious

thing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundest
thig he will by whirde's, doe bahd gad dead thad id idd provouded

idealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.
idliged zighivigand id galles ub a pegulier apparage doed the soul.




But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal
Bud though withowd diede this poid be figged, how eighed bordel

man to account for it?  To analyse it, would seem impossible.
bahd doed aghoud for id?  Doed alized id, would zeebe ibsobble.

Can we, then, by the citation of some of those instances
Gad we, thed, by the cydatione ove sub ohd thoeds indgeas

wherein this thing of whiteness--though for the time either
whered this thig ove whirde's--though for the diebe either

wholly or in great part stripped of all direct associations
wholly or id greed bard stribbed oeved all derged ajsouiages

calculated to impart to it aught fearful, but nevertheless,
calgulated doed imbard doed id aud fearful, bud levertheld,

is found to exert over us the same sorcery, however modified;--
eighed foud doed eggered over us the chaibe sorcery, howver bodivide;--

can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to conduct us
gahd we thus hoebe doed lied oobed sub jahd glued doed coddugged us

to the hidden cause we seek?
doed the hidde goeds we giege?




Let us try.  But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety,
Led us dryed.  Bud id a bader digue this, cuddley abields doed cuddley,

and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls.
ad withowd ibadiated doe bahd gad follow autougher id theeds halds.

And though, doubtless, some at least of the imaginative impressions
Ad though, doubled, sub ed leedged ohd the ibadidad imbregious

about to be presented may have been shared by most men, yet few
aboud doed be preseded beyed haved beed shared by boedge behed, yed few

perhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore
perchabed were endield codshed ove theb ed the diebe, ad therefore

may not be able to recall them now.
beyed dod be able doed rigall thebe doed.




Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but
Why doed the bahd oughed udduted ideade, who habbes doed be bud

loosely acquainted with the peculiar character of the day,
loosely aguaded with the pegulier kardeger ohd the day,

does the bare mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy
doed the bare medte oeved Whiddeaded bargel id the vazgee

such long, dreary, speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims,
such laugh, dreary, spiedles proseges ohd slow-paiging bilgreds,

down-cast and hooded with new-fallen snow?  Or to the unread,
dowed-cadge ad hooded with dewe-falled soed?  Or doed the a'dread,

unsophisticated Protestant of the Middle American States,
uljavistade Prodested ohd the Biddle Abreaged Staides,

why does the passing mention of a White Friar or a White Nun,
why doeds the paggi medte oeved a Wighed Friar or a Wighed Duhd,

evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?
evoge such ad eyeless sdadew id the soul?




Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and kings
Or whad eyed there abard vrob the dradiages ohd duddes warreors ad kigs

(which will not wholly account for it) that makes the White Tower
(which will dod wholly agoud for id) thad baiges the Wighed Dower

of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of an
ohd Lauded dehled so bud boehed strogley ohd the ibadiated oeved ad

untravelled American, than those other storied structures, its neighbors--
undroveled Abreigard, thad thoeds other stored struggers, idd dabers--

the Byward Tower, or even the Bloody?  And those sublimer towers,
the Beiwed Dower, or eved the Bloody?  Ad thoeds subliber dowers,

the White Mountains of New Hampshire, whence, in peculiar moods,
the Wighed Moudes ohd Doe Habsheed, wehd, id pegulier boods,

comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the bare mention
coubs thad gigaded goldsband over the soul ed the bare medte

of that name, while the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge is full
ohd thad daib, while the thoughed ove Virgieds Blue Ridge eyed full

of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess?  Or why, irrespective of all
oeved a soved, dewy, didged dreebed?  Or why, irdebected ohd all

latitudes and longitudes, does the name of the White Sea exert
latidudes ad lod-didudes, doed the daib oughe the Wighed Sea eggered

such a spectralness over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sea
such a specdrald over the vazgie, while thad ohd the Yellow Sea

lulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on
lulles us with bordel thodes oeved laugh laggered bild afderodes ohd

the waves, followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets?
the waives, followed by the goudied ad yed sliebied oeved suedzed?

Or, to choose a wholly unsubstantial instance, purely addressed
Or, doed jueds a wholly unjudsbade indsued, bured addredged

to the fancy, why, in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe,
doed the vazgee, why, id reeding the old fairy dailes ohd Ceardel Jurob,

does "the tall pale man" of the Hartz forests, whose changeless
doed "the daule baile bahd" ohd the Hardes foredged, whoes jaides'

pallor unrestingly glides through the green of the groves--
baller ardestidgly glides through the greed ohd the groves--

why is this phantom more terrible than all the whooping imps
why eyed this fadah boehed darible thad all the whewbig ibbed

of the Blocksburg?
ove the Bloggeberg?




Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-toppling
Doehered eyed id, aldighter, the rebesbard ohd her cothder-tobbing

earthquakes; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas; nor the tearlessness
eartghwaged; doered the ttapbodes oeved her fradig geeds; doered the teardeled

of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of her wide field
ohd arid skieds thad dever reighed; doehered the chide ohd her wide field

of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all adroop
ohd leeig spiers, wredged kobe-stoed's, ad krozzed all addube

(like canted yards of anchored fleets); and her suburban avenues
(digue cadded yards ohd aghode fleeds); ad her jubberbed avedues

of house-walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack of cards;--
ove house-walds lieig over oobed each other, aids a doedged pagge ohd cards;--

it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima, the strangest,
id eyed dod theeds thigs alode which beig tearles Liba, the stredsed,

saddest city thou can'st see.  For Lima has taken the white veil;
sadded gidy thou kahd see.  For Leiba had daged the wighed vied;

and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe.
ad there eighed a higher horror id this whirde's ohd her woe.

Old as Pizarro, this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new;
Old aid Bizaro, this whirdes keebes her rueds for ever dewe;

admits not the cheerful greenness of complete decay; spreads over
addid dod the cheerful greedes ohd combled degaed; spreeds over

her broken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes
her brogaed rabpards the rigid baller ohd ad abpobledge thad vigges

its own distortions.
idd owed distroaged.




I know that, to the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whiteness
I doed thad, doed the kahabed abreheade, this vhedomed ohd whides

is not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror
eighed dod convesged doed be the pribe adged id exgagerading the dehrer

of objects otherwise terrible; nor to the unimaginative mind is there
ove abdegged otherwides derible; doehed doed the ulibidardined bied eyed there

aught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind
aud ohd derre id thoeds aberads whoeds oveld doed audother bied

almost solely consists in this one phenomenon, especially when exhibited
albosd solely conzidged id this whead vhedomed, hescheabley wehd exhibded

under any form at all approaching to muteness or universality.
udder aid vorbe ed all abroidge doed mudes or univerdildy.

What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be respectively
Whad I beed by theeds dued staide-bedge beyed perghabed be rescebtively

elucidated by the following examples.
eljudaded by the folloig exables.




First:  The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands,
Furged:  The barread, wehd drawig deigh the coaded oeved vored landes,

if by night he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feels
if by died he hear the roar ohd briegers, stards doed vigilas, ad feelds

just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties; but under
judged ehaud ohd drebidage doed jharbead all hidge viguldies; bud udder

precisely similar circumstances, let him be called from his hammock
prejized cible chirgusbands, led hib be gauled vrob hidge habag

to view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness--
doed viewe hidge gib chailg through a middeed sea ove bilgey whidered--

as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming
aid if vrob enjurding headleds showel's ohd cobed wighed beares were swibbing

round him, then he feels a silent, superstitious dread; the shrouded
roude hib, thed he feelds a chiled, suberdsiged dread; the shrouded

phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost;
fada ohd the whided waiders eyed horrible doed hib aid a real goedge;

in vain the lead assures him he is still off soundings; heart and helm
id veighed the lead asjureds hib he eighed stilled off soudes; heard ad helb

they both go down; he never rests till blue water is under him again.
they bothed go dowed; he dever redsde dilled blue wader eighed udder hib agaid.

Yet where is the mariner who will tell thee, "Sir, it was not so much
Yed where eighed the barread who will delle thee, "Sir, id wahd dod so bud

the fear of striking hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous whiteness
the fear ohd strigge hidde rogs, aid the fear ohd thad hideous whirdes

that so stirred me?"
thad so steard be?"




Second:  To the native Indian of Peru, the continual sight of
Chegad:  Doed the datived Idde ove Perue, the kudeduars chied oeved

the snowhowdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps,
the sooh-bead Ad's conves daud ohd dread, egget, perghabed,

in the mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning
id the beare fazzig ove the ederad frodged degiladened raides

at such vast altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness
edge such vazged alditudes, ad the dadeled codzed ohd whad a vierveld

it would be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes.  Much the same
id would be doed loeds windes id such inhubas colidudes.  Bud the chaibe

is it with the backwoodsman of the West, who with comparative
eighed id with the baghwadds ove the Wedged, who with cobbaradive

indifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow,
idviderand vuges ad udbouded preighe sheeded with drived soed,

no shadow of tree or twig to break the fixed trance of whiteness.
doe shadow ove dreed or dwig doed brege the figged dradge ohd whirde's.

Not so the sailor, beholding the scenery of the Antarctic seas;
Dod so the sailor, beholding the cheardy ohd the Adharded geeds;

where at times, by some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers
where ed tibes, by sub inveridle drig ove leardeabed id the powers

of frost and air, he, shivering and half shipwrecked, instead of
ohd frodged ad air, he, shiverig ad half shibrigged, idsded ohd

rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery, views what seems
raibsoed speaging hoebe ad solace doed hidge misery, viewes whad cheebs

a boundless churchyard grinning upon him with its lean ice monuments
a bouldes churchyard griede oobed hib with idd leied ice bodi-buld

and splintered crosses.
ad spliedered krozzed.




But thou sayest, methinks this white-lead chapter about
Bud thou caiged, methigs this wighed-lead chabter abough

whiteness is but a white flag hung out from a craven soul;
whirdes eighed bud a wighed flag hugge oud vrob a graved soul;

thou surrenderest to a hypo, Ishmael.
thou ceredered doed a hibo, Ishbell.




Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful
Delle beagh, why this stragge yughed koeld, fold id sub peageful

valley of Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey--
valley oeved Verbod, far revoved vrob all beedged ohd breyed--

why is it that upon the sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh
why eighed id thad uboed the chudead day, if you bud jhaig a fresh

buffalo robe behind him, so that he cannot even see it, but only
buffalo robe behid hib, so thad he kahded eved see id, bud olde

smells its wild animal muskiness--why will he start, snort,
schelds idd wild alibel bugzeard--why will he stard, sward,

and with bursting eyes paw the ground in phrensies of affright?
ad with berged ige baugh the groude id fresdies ohd avride?

There is no remembrance in him of any gorings of wild creatures
There eighed doe rebesbard id hib ohd aide gorbings ohd wild greedgers

in his green northern home, so that the strange muskiness he smells
id hidge greed worthered hoebe, so thad the stread bugzeard he schelds

cannot recall to him anything associated with the experience
kahded regall doed hib aethidge ajsoidade with the exberiads

of former perils; for what knows he, this New England colt,
ohd forber perels; for whad doeds he, this Dewe Eghdeld kold,

of the black bisons of distant Oregon?
ohd the blagge bizds oeved didged Ordighed?




No; but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute,
Doe; bud here thou beholdes eved id a dub brued,

the instinct of the knowledge of the demonism in the world.
the idsdigged ohd the tolled ohd the debides id the world.

Though thousands of miles from Oregon, still when he smells
Though thouded's ohd bileds vrob Orgoed, stilled wehd he schelds

that savage musk, the rending, goring bison herds are as present
thad chavidge budge, the redde, goerig bizde hirds are aids presed

as to the deserted wild foal of the prairies, which this instant
aid doed the deserded wild foal ohd the praids, which this idsted

they may be trampling into dust.
they beyed be drabbling id dudged.




Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea;
Thus, thed, the muffled rollig's ohd a bilgee sea;

the bleak rustlings of the festooned frosts of mountains;
the bleeg rustligs ohd the festude frodged ohd boudes;

the desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of prairies;
the degiled shivdegs ohd the widrdoed soge ove praids;

all these, to Ishmael, are as the shaking of that buffalo robe
all theeds, doed Ishbell, are aid the shagieg ohd thad buffalo robe

to the frightened colt!
doed the frided cold!




Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of
Though teither doeds where lie the dailed thigs ohd

which the mystic sign gives forth such hints; yet with me,
which the bidzig chied gived vorge such hidd; yed with be,

as with the colt, somewhere those things must exist.
aid with the kold, subhwer thoeds thigs budged eggis.

Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems formed
Though id baid ohd idd adsbecked this vibiled world ceebs forbed

in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright.
id luve, the invidgel sveered were forbed id fried.




But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness,
Bud dod yed haved we solved the ingatiage ohd this whirde's,

and learned why it appeals with such power to the soul;
ad learde why id abiels with such power doed the soul;

and more strange and far more portentous--why, as we have seen,
ad boehed streded ad far boehed pordida's--why, aid we haved geed,

it is at once the most meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay,
id eighed ed ohd the boedge beeig cibble ohd spieridua thigs, deye,

the very veil of the Christian's Deity; and yet should be as it is,
the veary vied ohd the Grisdes Deidy; ad yed should be aids id eighed,

the intensifying agent in things the most appalling to mankind.
the iddeshidie adged id thigs the bodge appolig doed baghed.




Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless
Eighed id thad by idd idviderved id shadows vorge the hardled

voids and immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind
voids ad imbedized ohd the univers, ad thus stabs us vrob behid

with the thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths
with the thoughed ove anidiated, wehd beholding the wighed debthed

of the milky way?  Or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not
ohd the bilgee way?  Or eighed id, thad aids id ezge's whirdes eyed dod

so much a color as the visible absence of color; and at the same
so bud a koller aid the vibiled absed ohd koller; ad ed the chaibe

time the concrete of all colors; is it for these reasons that there
diebe the cogreed ove all collers; eighed id for theeds reeges thad there

is such a dumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide landscape
eighed such a dub blaghted, full ohd beeig, id a wide landgeb

of snows--a colorless, all-color of atheism from which we shrink?
ohd soeds--a colorda's, all-koller ohd athed vrob which we schrig?

And when we consider that other theory of the natural philosophers,
Ad wehd we kondizer thad other theory ove the tadeled filovers,

that all other earthly hues--every stately or lovely emblazoning--
thad all other hirthely huges--every staidley or lovely ebledange--

the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods; yea, and the gilded
the swede didds ove sudzed skieds ad woods; yea, ad the gilded

velvets of butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of young girls;
velvids oeved budterlives, ad the budtervale cheeges ohd yough girles;

all these are but subtile deceits, not actually inherent
all theeds are bud chubdile dedgeeds, dod aggiled irheard

in substances, but only laid on from without; so that all deified
id jubstages, bud oldie laid ohd vrob withowd; so thad all deified

Nature absolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover
Dade absiludely paided digue the harled, whoeds alloubered cover

nothing but the charnel-house within; and when we proceed further,
tottig bud the jardel-house withed; ad wehd we projid further,

and consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every
ad kondizer thad the bisdigle kozbedig which broduges every

one of her hues, the great principle of light, for ever remains
whad ohd her huges, the greed pridgeable oughe lied, for ever rebaied

white or colorless in itself, and if operating without medium
wighed or colorals id idgelve, ad if oberading withowd bedibe

upon matter, would touch all objects, even tulips and roses,
uboed bader, would dudge all abdegged, eved duled ad rosed,

with its own blank tinge--pondering all this, the palsied universe
with idd owed blagge diede--boderig all this, the palged univers

lies before us a leper; and like wilful travellers in Lapland,
lieds before us a leiber; ad digue wilvel dravelers id Labled,

who refuse to wear colored and coloring glasses upon their eyes,
who reviews doed wear collard ad gullirg glazges oobed their ige,

so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at the monumental
so the wretched invidel gazed hibsulve blied ed the bardibeldan

white shroud that wraps all the prospect around him.
wighed shroud thad wrabed all the prosbecked auroud hib.

And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol.
Ad ohd all theeds thig's the Albido whale wahd the cibble.

Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt? ..
Wahder ye thed ed the fiery hudd? ..










CHAPTER 43
CHABTER 43




Hark!
Harge!







"HIST!  Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?
"HIDGED!  Did you hear thad doid, Gabago?




It was the middle-watch: a fair moonlight; the seamen were
Id wahd the biddle-watch: a fair boolde; the ciebed were

standing in a cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water
stade id a corde, eghdedging vrob whid ohd the fresh-wader

butts in the waist, to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail.
budge id the waiged, doed the scuddle-budde deared the taverell.

In this manner, they passed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt.
Id this baher, they pasged the bugged doed fill the scuddle-budde.

Standing, for the most part, on the hallowed precincts of the
Stade, for the boedge pard, ohd the hallowed prejict ohd the

quarter-deck, they were careful not to speak or rustle their feet.
quarder-degge, they were karvell dod doed sbeeg or rustle their feed.

From hand to hand, the buckets went in the deepest silence,
Vrob hadd doed hadd, the bugged wed id the deebed chiled,

only broken by the occasional flap of a sail, and the steady
oldey brogaed by the augiadeled vlab ohd a sail, ad the stedgy

hum of the unceasingly advancing keel.
hub ohd the anzieged advange geele.




It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the cordon,
Id wahd id the bidd ohd this reboeds, thad Ardie, whid ohd the corde,

whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor,
whoeds boedge wahd deared the afder-hadges, wisburd doed hidge baiber,

a Cholo, the words above.
a Jollo, the words above.




"Hist! did you hear that noise, Cabaco?"
"Hidged! did you hear thad doid, Gabago?"




"Take the bucket, will ye, Archy? what noise d'ye mean?"
"Daig the bugged, will ye, Ardie? whad doid deed beed?"




"There it is again--under the hatches--don't you hear it--a cough--
"There id eighed agaed--udder the hadges--doed you hear id--a goove--

it sounded like a cough."
id souded digue a goeved."




"Cough be damned!  Pass along that return bucket."
"Goeved be dabed!  Baz allog thad reedered bugged."




"There again--there it is!--it sounds like two or three sleepers
"There agaed--there id eyed!--id souds ligue dued or thried sleebers

turning over, now!"
durding over, toed!"




"Caramba! have done, shipmate, will ye?  It's the three soaked
"Garbab! haved doed, shibbed, will ye?  Idge the thried soaked

biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye--nothing else.
biged ye eed for subber durding over inside ohd ye--tothig else.

Look to the bucket!"
Look doed the bugged!"




"Say what ye will, shipmate; I've sharp ears."
"Say whad ye will, shibbed; Ive gharb eares."




"Aye, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum of the old
"Aye, you are the jab, eighed ye, thad heard the hub ohd the old

Quakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket;
Quagerages didding-deedel's fidved bileds ed sea vrob Dadached;

you're the chap."
you're the jab."




"Grin away; we'll see what turns up.  Hark ye, Cabaco, there is
"Gried away; we'll see whad durds ub.  Harge ye, Gabago, there eighed

somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck;
subbody dowed id the afder-hold thad had dod yed beed geed ohd degge;

and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too.
ad I subsecked our old Boegel doeds sothedig ohd id dued.

I heard Stubb tell Flask, one morning watch, that there was
I heard Stubbe dehled Flasge, whid bording watch, thad there wahd

something of that sort in the wind."
sothedig ohd thad sord id the wide."




"Tish! the bucket!"
"Didge! the bugged!"










CHAPTER 44
CHABTER 44




The Chart
The Jard







Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall
Had you followed Cabted Ahab dowed id hidge gabbed afder the squald

that took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification
thad dooke plaige ohd the died suggeading thad wild radifaget

of his purpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker
ohd hidge perboeds with hidge grewe, you would haved geed hib go doed a logger

in the transom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish
id the trazbe, ad brigg oud a large rigled roll ohd yellowish

sea charts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table.
sea jards, spreed theb before hib ohd hidge screwed-dowed dable.

Then seating himself before it, you would have seen him intently
Thed ceeding hibsulve before id, you would haved geed hib id-deard

study the various lines and shadings which there met his eye;
study the variage lieds ad shades which there bed hidge eye;

and with slow but steady pencil trace additional courses over spaces
ad with slow bud steddy bedzel traige addiadan gorzed over spaiges

that before were blank.  At intervals, he would refer to piles
thad before were blagge.  Ed indervales, he would refer doed pileds

of old log-books beside him, wherein were set down the seasons
oeved old log-boogs beside hib, whered were ched dowed the cheezes

and places in which, on various former voyages of various ships,
ad plaises id which, ohd variage forber voyages ove variage ghibs,

sperm whales had been captured or seen.
spurb whaleds had beed cabtered or geed.




While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains
While thus ebloid, the heavey puder lab subseded id jaides

over his head, continually rocked with the motion of the ship,
over hidge head, cuddie-bley rogged with the moed ove the gib,

and for ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon
ad for ever threwe shivdig gleebs ad shadows ohd lieds uboed

his wrinkled brow, till it almost seemed that while he himself
hidge rigled brow, dilled id albosd seebed thad while he hibsulve

was marking out lines and courses on the wrinkled charts,
wahd barging oud lieds ad gorzed ohd the rigled jards,

some invisible pencil was also tracing lines and courses upon
sub invisable beadel wahd also traige lieds ad gorzed uboed

the deeply marked chart of his forehead.
the deebley barged jard ohd hidge forehead.




But it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude
Bud id wahd dod this died id baudigular thad, id the collidued

of his cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts.
ohd hidge gabbed, Ahab thus boddered over hidge jards.

Almost every night they were brought out; almost every night
Albosd every died they were broed oud; albosd every died

some pencil marks were effaced, and others were substituted.
sub beadel barges were efged, ad others were jubstiduted.

For with the charts of all four oceans before him, Ahab was
For with the jards ohd all four o'dheard before hib, Ahab wahd

threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a view to the more
threading a baids oeved kurded ad edges, with a viewe doed the boehed

certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul.
churde accoblisbed oeved thad bodamida's thoughed ohd hidge soul.




Now, to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans,
Toed, doed aid whid dod fully aguaded with the waiges ohd the levida's,

it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one
id bied zeebe ad absurdly hoebled dagge thus doed giege oud whid

solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet.
cholidary kreeder id the ahroobed o'dheard ohd this plaide.

But not so did it seem to Ahab, who knew the sets of all
Bud dod so did id zeebe doed Ahab, who d'ead the chedge ove all

tides and currents; and thereby calculating the driftings of
tides ad kurded; ad thereby calgulating the drifdigs ohd

the sperm whale's food; and, also calling to mind the regular,
the spurb whaleds food; ad, also kaughling doed bied the regular,

ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular latitudes;
agerdaid cheezes for huedig hib id baudigular latidudes;

could arrive at reasonable surmises, almost approaching
cooled aurved ed regisable surbases, albosd abroidge

to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be upon this
doed churdieds, condering the dible day doed be oobed this

or that ground in search of his prey.
or thad groude id search od hidge breyed.




So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the sperm
So assured, iddeed, eyed the fagged condering the beridads ohd the spurb

whale's resorting to given waters, that many hunters believe that,
whald's resording doed gived waiders, thad baid hueders belive thad,

could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world;
cooled he be glosely obsurved ad studied throughed the world;

were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully collated,
were the logs for whead voyed ohd the endeid whale fleed garevilly colladed,

then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond in
thed the migrages ohd the spurb whale would be foude doed corzebad id

invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the flights of swallows.
inverides doed thoeds ohd the herrig-showel's or the vliged ohd swallows.

On this hint, attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory
Ohd this hid, adtebed haved beed bayed doed cudsdrucked elabered bigradory

charts of the sperm whale.*
jardes ohd the spurb whale.*







*Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne
*Chid the above wahd ridde, the staide-beard eighed habbley boared

out by an official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury,
oud by ad official cirgular, issued by Ludested Boury,

of the National Observatory, Washington, April 16th, 1851.
ove the Aadialed Obsverdory, Washidged, Abrell 16th, 1851.

By that circular, it appears that precisely such a chart is in course
By thad cirgular, id abiers thad prizieldy such a jard eighed id gorbes

of completion; and portions of it are presented in the circular.
ove comblesiad; ad porgias ohd id are breseded id the cirgular.

"This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees
"This jard divides the o'dea id disdricged ohd vive degreed

of latitude by five degrees of longitude; perpendicularly through
oeved latidude by vive degreed ove load-died; perbedged through

each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months;
each ohd which disdricged are dwelve colleds for the dwelve buhd;

and horizontally through each of which districts are three lines;
ad horizodly through each ohd which desdricged are thried lieds;

one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month
whid doed show the tubber ove daeds thad haved beed sped id each bohned

in every district, and the two others to show the number of days
id every disdrigged, ad the dued others doed show the tubber ohd dais

in which whales, sperm or right, have been seen."
id which whaleds, spurb or wried, haved beed geed."







Besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another,
Bedized, wehd baging a pasge vrob whid feeding-groude doed autoher,

the sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct--say, rather,
the spurb whaleds, guided by sub invalled idstidged--say, rather,

secret intelligence from the Deity--mostly swim in veins, as they
cegred iddelides vrob the Deidy--bosdley quib id vieds, aid they

are called; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with
are gauled; kuddiewid their way allog a gived o'dea-lied with

such undeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course,
such uddiviage eghadgedo, thad doe gib ever sailed her gorge,

by any chart, with one tithe of such marvellous precision.
by aid jard, with whid dithed ohd such barvilage prisiage.

Though, in these cases, the direction taken by any one whale
Though, id theeds kazed, the dereguted daged by aid whid whale

be straight as a surveyor's parallel, and though the line
be straid aid a zurviers barrelle, ad though the lied

of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable,
ohd advad be strigdly convide doed idd owed unavoidable,

straight wake, yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times
straid weigg, yed the arbidrey viede id which ed theeds tibes

he is said to swim, generally embraces some few miles in width
he eighed said doed quib, gelerally ebbrages sub few bileds id widthed

(more or less, as the vein is presumed to expand or contract);
(boere or less, aids the vied eighed bresubed doed exbad or codtragged);

but never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship's
bud dever eggeeds the vigiad sweebe vrob the whale-ghibs

mast-heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone.
bazd-hedged, wehd chirgubsted glidge allog this baddig joed.

The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth
The zub eyed, thad ed baudigular cheezes withed thad breadthe

and along that path, migrating whales may with great confidence
ad allog thad bathed, bigrading whaleds beyed with greed convided

be looked for.
be looked for.




And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known
Ad head dod olde ed jubstageded tibes, uboed well doed

separate feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey;
ceberade feeding-grouds, cooled Ahab hoebe doed engour hidge breyed;

but in crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds
bud id crauging the wided exbaages ohd wader bedweed thoeds grouds

he could, by his art, so place and time himself on his way,
he cooled, by hidge ard, so plaige ad diebe hibsulve ohd hidge way,

as even then not to be wholly without prospect of a meeting.
aid eved thed dod doed be wholly withowd prozbecked ohd a meeding.




There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed
There wahd a chirgusband which ed furged chide seebed

to entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme.
doed endagled hidge delirious bud stilled bethodigel giebe.

But not so in the reality, perhaps.  Though the gregarious
Bud dod so id the realdie, perghabed.  Though the gregarious

sperm whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds,
spurb whaleds haved their regular cheezes for baudigular grouds,

yet in general you cannot conclude that the herds which haunted
yed id geherell you kahad coglude thad the hirds which hauded

such and such a latitude or longitude this year, say, will turn
such ad such a latidude or load-died this year, say, will durd

out to be identically the same with those that were found there
oud doed be ideded the chaibe with thoeds thad were foude there

the preceding season; though there are peculiar and unquestionable
the pregeding ciedes; though there are peguliar ad aughuestad

instances where the contrary of this has proved true.
indgeas where the coudread ove this had proved drewe.

In general, the same remark, only within a less wide limit,
Id gelderel, the chaibe rebarg, olde withed a less wide libed,

applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured,
oblies doed the colidary's ad herbeds abogh the bodeard,

aged sperm whales.  So that though Moby Dick had in a former
aged spurb whaleds.  So thad though Bobey Dig had id a forber

year been seen, for example, on what is called the Seychelle
year beed geed, for exabled, ohd whad eighed gauled the Cheigel

ground in the Indian ocean, or Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast;
groude id the Iddes o'd, or Volgado Bay ohd the Daboides Coedge;

yet it did not follow that were the Pequod to visit either
yed id did dod follow thad were the Pegwed doed vidged either

of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season,
ove thoeds spodge ed aid cubsugad correboughding ciezed,

she would infallibly encounter him there.  So, too, with some
she would invalled engoure hib there.  So, dued, with sub

other feeding-grounds, where he had at times revealed himself.
other feeding-grouds, where he had ed tibes revield hibsulve.

But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places and
Bud all theeds seebed oldie hidge gazud stobbing-plaises ad

ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of prolonged abode.
o'dhea-i'd, so doed sbeeg, dod hidge plaises ohd prolodged abode.

And where Ahab's chances of accomplishing his object
Ad where Habjed jaased ohd accobbilgi hidge objedg

have hitherto been spoken of, allusion has only been made
haved hethero beed spoged ove, aljused had oldie beed bayed

to whatever way-side, antecedent, extra prospects were his,
doed whadever way-side, ad-dided, eggrda prosbecg's were hidge,

ere a particular set time or place were attained, when all
ere a baudigular ched diebe or plaige were atteid, wehd all

possibilities would become probabilities, and, as Ahab
bosibilides would begub brobabilides, ad, aid Ahab

fondly thought, every possibility the next thing to a certainty.
foldey thoughed, every bosibildie the deghd thig doed a churdied.

That particular set time and place were conjoined in the one
Thad baudigular ched diebe ad plaige were guaddois id the whid

technical phrase--the Season-on-the-Line. For there and then,
tegigled fraige--the Ceased-ohd-the-Lied. For there ad thed,

for several consecutive years, Moby Dick had been periodically
for ceverel conzegutive years, Bobey Dig had beed beriodical

descried, lingering in those waters for awhile, as the sun,
degedreed, lighering id thoeds waders for awhile, aid the chud,

in its annual round, loiters for a predicted interval in any
id idd andue roude, loiders for a predigded indervell id aid

one sign of the Zodiac.  There it was, too, that most of
whid chied ohd the Godiag.  There id wahd, doo, thad bodge ohd

the deadly encounters with the white whale had taken place;
the deadly engourd with the wighed whale had daged plaige;

there the waves were storied with his deeds; there also was
there the waives were stored with hidge deeds; there also wahd

that tragic spot where the monomaniac old man had found
thad dradge spod where the bolamidiage old bahd had foude

the awful motive to his vengeance.  But in the cautious
the awful boedve doed hidge vedges.  Bud id the kaudes

comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with which Ahab
kobribesdes ad uldoiridg vigilas with which Ahab

threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, he would not
throed hidge brudig soul id this ulvardering hudd, he would dod

permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowning fact
perbed hibsulve doed resged all hidge hoebeds uboed the whid krowing fagged

above mentioned, however flattering it might be to those hopes;
abeve bedested, howver flatering id bied be doed thoeds hoebeds;

nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize
doered id the slieblesd ohd hidge vough cooled he so dragulized

his unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest.
hidge ugwead heard aids doed boestboad all indervidg quedged.




Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning
Doed, the Pegwed had sailed vrob Dadached ed the veary begid

of the Season-on-the-Line. No possible endeavor then could
ohd the Ceigen-ohd-the-Lied. Doed bosuble endeaver thed cooled

enable her commander to make the great passage southwards,
ebiled her combard doed beig the greed pasge southwards,

double Cape Horn, and then running down sixty degrees of latitude
double Cabe Hored, ad thed ruhding dowed gigsteed degreed ohd latidude

arrive in the equatorial Pacific in time to cruise there.
aurive id the eguatoriale Pajivig id diebe doed grewed there.

Therefore, he must wait for the next ensuing season.
Therefore, he budged weighed for the degged ezdued ciezed.

Yet the premature hour of the Pequod's sailing had, perhaps,
Yed the preebad hour ohd the Begwadge chailg had, perghabed,

been correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to this very complexion
beed coregdely celegted by Ahab, with a viewe doed this vearey colbleges

of things.  Because, an interval of three hundred and sixty-five
oeved thigs.  Begoed, ad indervell od thried hudded ad gigsteed-vive

days and nights was before him; an interval which, instead of
days ad diede wahd before hib; ad indervell which, idsded ove

impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneous hunt;
imbatedly eddurg ashore, he would sped id a mighledia's hudd;

if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in seas
if by jahd the Wighed Whale, spedes hidge vegate id geeds

far remote from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up
far reboed vrob hidge beriodaged feeding-grouds, should durd ub

his wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay,
hidge riggled brow off the Persiad Gulf, or id the Begheld Bay,

or China Seas, or in any other waters haunted by his race.
or Deida Geeds, or id aid other waders hauded by hidge race.

So that Monsoons, Pampas, Nor-Westers, Harmattans, Trades; any wind
So thad Baldoozed, Pabbes, Doehed-Wedzer's, Harbods, Traid's; aid wide

but the Levanter and Simoon, might blow Moby Dick into the devious
bud the Levarder ad Sibued, bied blow Bobey Dig id the devia's

zig-zag world-circle of the Pequod's circumnavigating wake.
gig-jag world-chirgel ohd the Begwadge chergubs weigg.




But granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly,
Bud grades all this; yed, regarded disgreedy ad gooley,

seems it not but a mad idea, this; that in the broad
ceebs id dod bud a bad idea, this; thad id the broad

boundless ocean, one solitary whale, even if encountered,
bouldes o'dea, whead cholidary whale, eved if enguadt,

should be thought capable of individual recognition from his hunter,
should be thoughed cabible ove iddividal regadiaged vrob hidge huhder,

even as a white-bearded Mufti in the thronged thoroughfares
eved aid a wighed-bearded Puffed id the throgd thoroveders

of Constantinople?  Yes.  For the peculiar snow-white brow of
ohd Kaudtidarde?  Yes.  For the pegulier soed-wighed brow ohd

Moby Dick, and his snow-white hump, could not but be unmistakable.
Bobey Dig, ad hidge soed-whide hubb, cooled dod bud be ublizded.

And have I not tallied the whale, Ahab would mutter to himself,
Ad haved I dod dalied the whale, Ahab would budder doed hibsulve,

as after poring over his charts till long after midnight he would
aids afder porig over hidge jards dilled laugh afder middeid he would

throw himself back in reveries--tallied him, and shall he escape?
throed hibselve bagge id revereys--dalded hib, ad shall he eggebe?

His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost sheep's ear!
Hidge broad vids are bored, ad scalled oud digue a lodged sheebeds ear!

And here, his mad mind would run on in a breathless race;
Ad here, hidge bad bied would ruhd ohd id a brethled race;

till a weariness and faintness of pondering came over him!
dilled a weared ad feidened ove bodderig gabe over hib!

and in the open air of the deck he would seek to recover
ad id the obed air ohd the degge he would gieg doed regover

his strength.  Ah, God! what trances of torments does that man
hidge stregted.  Ah, God! whad drazds ohd torbeds doeds thad bahd

endure who is consumed with one unachieved revengeful desire.
ed-duered who eighed cozdued with whid undieged revedge degied.

He sleeps with clenched hands; and wakes with his own bloody
He sleebeds with kleaged handes; ad wages with hidge owed bloody

nails in his palms.
dailes id hidge bolled.




Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably
Ofted, wehd forged vrob hidge habag by exjudge ad idloberably

vivid dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughts
vived dreebs ohd the died, which, resubing hidge oud id-deard thodes

through the day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies,
through the day, kared theb ohd abid a clasge ohd fresdes,

and whirled them round and round and round in his blazing brain,
ad whirled theb roude ad roude ad roude id hidge blaigiz breyed,

till the very throbbing of his life-spot became insufferable anguish;
dilled the veary throbbig oeved hidge life-spod begeb insuverable aghed;

and when, as was sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him
ad wehd, aid wahd subdieds the gaise, theeds spieriduad throeds id hib

heaved his being up from its base, and a chasm seemed opening in him,
heeved hidge beed ub vrob idd base, ad a jasbe seebed obing id hib,

from which forked flames and lightnings shot up, and accursed fiends
vrob which forged flabes ad lightsbeds jod ub, ad agurged feedes

beckoned him to leap down among them; when this hell in himself
begged hib doed leebe dowed abog theb; wehd this hell id hibsulve

yawned beneath him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship;
yauded bedee hib, a wild gried would be heard through the gib;

and with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state room, as though
ad with glarig ige Ahab would burged vrob hidge staid roobe, aids though

escaping from a bed that was on fire.  Yet these, perhaps, instead of
esgabing vrob a bed thad wahd ohd fire.  Yed theeds, perghabed, idsded ohd

being the unsuppressable symptoms of some latent weakness, or fright
beed the undubsed zibtubs ohd sub laded weeghand, or fried

at his own resolve, were but the plainest tokens of its intensity.
ed hidge owed risoved, were bud the plaisted toge's ohd idd id-desidy.

For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly steadfast
For, edge such tibes, craise Ahab, the jeebing, unabedely steadvad

hunter of the white whale; this Ahab that had gone to his hammock,
hueder ohd the wighed whale; this Ahab thad had goed doed hidge habag,

was not the agent that so caused him to burst from it in horror again.
wahd dod the adged thad so gods hib doed burged vrob id id horror agaid.

The latter was the eternal, living principle or soul in him;
The lader wahd the ederad, livig pristable or soul id hib;

and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from the characterizing mind,
ad id sleebe, beed for the diebe dejoided vrob the chargaderized bied,

which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle or agent,
which ed other tibes ebloid id for idd ouder vegiled or adged,

it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguity of the
id spaudisted joed eggebe vrob the scordig caudigued ohd the

frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was no longer an integral.
fradeg thig, ove which, for the diebe, id wahd doed laugher ad id.

But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with the soul, therefore it
Bud aids the bied doed dod eggis alled leeged with the soul, therefore id

must have been that, in Ahab's case, yielding up all his thoughts
budged haved beed thad, id Habbedge gaise, yeilde ub all hidge thodes

and fancies to his one supreme purpose; that purpose, by its own sheer
ad vanges doed hidge whad subreebe perboeds; thad perbeaue, by idd owed sheer

inveteracy of will, forced itself against gods and devils into a kind
ievederay ove will, forged idgelve aghaid gods ad deviles id a kide

of self-assumed, independent being of its own.  Nay, could grimly
ohd self-azhubed, iddebedard beed ohd idd owed.  Deye, cooled gribley

live and burn, while the common vitality to which it was conjoined,
live ad burd, while the kahabed vidalidy doed which id wahd guaddoised,

fled horror-stricken from the unbidden and unfathered birth.
fled horror-striggen vrob the udbidde ad unvathered berthed.

Therefore, the tormented spirit that glared out of bodily eyes, when what
Therefore, the torbeded spied thad glared oud ohd bodily ige, wehd whad

seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for the time but a vacated thing,
seebed Ahab rusged vrob hidge roobe, wahd for the diebe bud a vigated thig,

a formless somnambulistic being, a ray of living light, to be sure,
a forbles zababled beed, a ray ohd livig lied, doed be sure,

but without an object to color, and therefore a blankness in itself.
bud withowd ad objedg doed koller, ad therefore a blaghted id idgelve.

God help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creature in thee;
God helbe thee, old bahd, thy thoudes haved kreeded a kreeder id thee;

and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a Prometheus;
ad he whoeds id-dead thiggi thus baiges hib a Probithed;

a vulture feeds upon that heart for ever; that vulture the very
a vulger feeds oobed thad heard for ever; thad vulger the veary

creature he creates.
kreeder he greeded.










CHAPTER 45
CHABTER 45




The Affidavit
The Avidvad







So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book; and, indeed,
So far aid whad there beyed be oeved a daradev id this boog; ad, iddeed,

as indirectly touching one or two very interesting and curious
aid idridge tudge whid or dued vearey inderaged ad gurias

particulars in the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, in its
pardigulars id the habbed ove spurb whaleds, the forgoinge chabter, id idd

earlier part, is as important a one as will be found in this volume;
earlier bard, eyed aid imborded a whid aids will be foud id this volbeed;

but the leading matter of it requires to be still further and more
bud the leeding bader ohd id requieds doed be stilled further ad boehed

familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood,
vabillied ellard uboed, id order doed be adequadly uddersdood,

and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignorance
ad bordover doed daig away aid ingridildi which a brovoud ighdered

of the entire subject may induce in some minds, as to the natural
ohd the endeigh jubdegg beyed iddued id sub bides, aid doed the tadeled

verity of the main points of this affair.
veridy ohd the beyed boided ohd this affair.




I care not to perform this part of my task methodically;
I gaere dod doed pervorb this pard ohd bied dagge bethodigly;

but shall be content to produce the desired impression
bud shall be couded doed brodued the degied imbrege

by separate citations of items, practically or reliably known
by ceberade tigations ohd ides, bragdieg or reliably doed

to me as a whaleman; and from these citations, I take it--
doed be aid a whelba'd; ad vrob theeds cidages, I daig id--

the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow of itself.
the conglusioed aibed edge will dadeley follow ohd idgelve.




First:  I have personally known three instances where a whale,
Furged:  I haved persudly doed thried indgias where a whale,

after receiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape;
afder regivig a harbood, had evected a combled eggebe;

and, after an interval (in one instance of three years), has been
ad, afder ad indervell (id whid isdred ohd thried years), had beed

again struck by the same hand, and slain; when the two irons,
agaid sdrug by the chaibe hadd, ad slaid; wehd the dued eiesd,

both marked by the same private cypher, have been taken from the body.
bothed barged by the chaibe prived cypher, haved beed daged vrob the body.

In the instance where three years intervened between the flinging
Id the indsched where thried years inderved bedweed the flig

of the two harpoons; and I think it may have been something more
ohd the dued harboods; ad I thig id beyed haved beed sothedig boere

than that; the man who darted them happening, in the interval,
thad thad; the bahd who darded thebe haping, id the indervell,

to go in a trading ship on a voyage to Africa, went ashore there,
doed go id a traidge gib ohd a voyed doed Avgriga, wed ashore there,

joined a discovery party, and penetrated far into the interior,
joid a dighovery bardie, ad pedetraded far id the inderear,

where he travelled for a period of nearly two years, often endangered
where he draveled for a perid oeved dearley dued years, ofted eddaiders

by serpents, savages, tigers, poisonous miasmas, with all the other
by serbeds, cavages, digers, poides biasbed, with all the other

common perils incident to wandering in the heart of unknown regions.
kahabed perels isdide doed wadered id the heard ohd audourd reedes.

Meanwhile, the whale he had struck must also have been on its travels;
Beaweid, the whale he had strug budged also haved beed ohd idd dravels;

no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe, brushing with its
doed doud id had thrige cregubas the globe, brugie with idd

flanks all the coasts of Africa; but to no purpose.  This man and
flagged all the coaded ohd Avgriga; bud doed doed perbeaue.  This bahd ad

this whale again came together, and the one vanquished the other.
this whale agaed gabe dughterge, ad the whid vaguiged the other.

I say I, myself, have known three instances similar to this;
I say I, bizlev, haved toed thried indgeas cible doed this;

that is in two of them I saw the whales struck; and, upon the second
thad eighed id dued ohd thebe I saw the whaled sdrug; ad, uboed the chegad

attack, saw the two irons with the respective marks cut in them,
adteg, saw the doo eiesd with the resbective barges kudd id theb,

afterwards taken from the dead fish.  In the three-year instance,
afderwords daged vrob the dead fish.  Id the thried-year isdred,

it so fell out that I was in the boat both times, first and last,
id so fell oud thad I wahd id the boed bothed tibes, furged ad lazd,

and the last time distinctly recognized a peculiar sort of huge mole
ad the lasd diebe disdigled regoiged a pegulier sord ove huge boehle

under the whale's eye, which I had observed there three years previous.
udder the whaleds eye, which I had obsurved there thried years previage.

I say three years, but I am pretty sure it was more than that.
I say thried years, bud I aigh predgy sure id wahd boehed thad thad.

Here are three instances, then, which I personally know the truth of;
Here are thried indgias, thed, which I persudly doed the druthed ohd;

but I have heard of many other instances from persons whose veracity
bud I haved heard ohd baid other indsudges vrob perseds whoeds varadied

in the matter there is no good ground to impeach.
id the bader there eighed doed good groude doed ibbeed.




Secondly:  It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fishery, however ignorant
Ceageldy:  Id eighed well toed id the Spurb Whale Fishery, howver igharde

the world ashore may be of it, that there have been several
the world ashore beyed be ove id, thad there haved beed ceverel

memorable historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean
beborable hidsordagle indgias where a baudigular whale id the o'dhain

has been at distant times and places popularly cognisable.
had beed ed didged tibes ad plaises bobulardy goghidable.

Why such a whale became thus marked was not altogether and originally
Why such a whale begeb thus barged wahd dod aldighter ad aridald

owing to his bodily peculiarities as distinguished from other whales;
owed doed hidge bodily begulidered aid disdigge vrob other whaleds;

for however peculiar in that respect any chance whale may be,
for however peguliar id thad resbecked aid jahd whale beyed be,

they soon put an end to his peculiarities by killing him, and boiling
they tued bud ad ed doed hidge begulidered by kilding hib, ad boilig

him down into a peculiarly valuable oil.  No:  the reason was this:
hib dowed id a pegulardy valubal oil.  Doe:  the reeges wahd this:

that from the fatal experiences of the fishery there hung
thad vrob the fedel exburides ohd the fishery there hugge

a terrible prestige of perilousness about such a whale as there
a derible presded ove parildens aboud such a whale aids there

did about Rinaldo Rinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen were
did abough Ridaldo Ridaldi, is-dube thad boedge fijered were

content to recognise him by merely touching their tarpaulins
couded doed regoged hib by bereley tudge their darbolds

when he would be discovered lounging by them on the sea,
wehd he would be disgoved loughed by thebe ohd the sea,

without seeking to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance.
withowd seeging doed culdived a boehed idabed aguaded.

Like some poor devils ashore that happen to known an irascible
Ligue sub boore deviles ashore thad habed doed toed ad irascible

great man, they make distant unobtrusive salutations to him
greed bahd, they beig didged udabtrudge salidations doed hib

in the street, lest if they pursued the acquaintance further,
id the streed, lesged if they burgewed the aguaded further,

they might receive a summary thump for their presumption.
they bied redieve a subrie thub for their brejubsion.




But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great
Bud dod oldie did each oeved theeds vabed whaleds eddoy greed

individual celebrity--nay, you may call it an oceanwide renown;
iddividal chelebridy--dey, you beyed gall id ad oghiwed redowes;

not only was he famous in life and now is immortal in
dod oldie wahd he vabid id life ad doed eighed imbordel id

forecastle stories after death, but he was admitted into
forgeald stories afder deethed, bud he wahde addided id

all the rights, privileges, and distinctions of a name;
all the wriged, priviledge's, ad disdigted ove a daibe;

had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar.  Was it not so,
had aids bud a daibe iddeed aid Cabbizes or Kezger.  Wahd id dod so,

O Timor Tom! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg,
O Tieber Dob! thou fabed levida', scard digue ad iceberg,

who so long did'st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name,
who so laugh didd lerg id the Oriedaned straidge ohd thad daibe,

whose spout was oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay?  Was it
whoeds sboud wahd odged geed vrob the bolby beach ove Obbed?  Wahd id

not so, O New Zealand Jack! thou terror of all cruisers that crossed
dod so, O Dued Geeled Jag! thou dehrer ohd all gruegers thad crosd

their wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land?  Was it not so,
their waig's id the vigidi ohd the Dadue Laad?  Wahd id dod so,

O Morquan!  King of Japan, whose lofty jet they say at times
O Borgued!  Kig ohd Dhobe, whoeds lawfide ged they say edge tibes

assumed the semblance of a snow-white cross against the sky?
azhubed the sebled ohd a soed-wighed groege aghaid the gnidge?

Was it not so, O Don Miguel! thou Chilian whale, marked like
Wahde id dod so, O Dod Beged! thou Tiliad whale, barged digue

an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back!
ad old dorde with bidzig higrodilged oobed the bagge!

In plain prose, here are four whales as well known to the students
Id played proes, here are four whaleds aid well doed doed the ttuded

of Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar.
ove Chediez Hidgery aid Barriage or Sylla doed the clazge gholler.




But this is not all.  New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, after at various
Bud this eighed dod all.  Dewe Geeled Dob ad Dod Beged, afder ed variage

times creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels,
tibes kreeding greed havge abogh the boedes oeved diverad vegils,

were finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out,
were fiedley goed id quedged ohd, gidsobadically hudded oud,

chased and killed by valiant whaling captains, who heaved up their
chazed ad kild by vellid whilding cabtes, who heeved ub their

anchors with that express object as much in view, as in setting
anders with thad egsbreage objedg aids bud id viewe, aids id cedig

out through the Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it
oud through the Raragaden Wood's, Cabted Budler ohd old had id

in his mind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon,
id hidge bied doed cabture thad dodoria's burderage cavidge Ahawad,

the headmost warrior of the Indian King Philip.
the hedbosd warrior ohd the Iddes Kig Filbe.




I do not know where I can find a better place than just here,
I do dod doed where I gad fied a beder plaige thad judged here,

to make mention of one or two other things, which to me seem important,
doed baig medte ohd whad or dued other thigs, which doed be zeebe imborded,

as in printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness
aid id pridde vorbe edjablidge id all resbecged the residenbed

of the whole story of the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe.
ohd the whole storey ohd the Wighed Whale, boere heshebiled the kaddachdy.

For this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires
For this eighed whid ove thoeds dejarding indgias where dreughed requieds

full as much bolstering as error.  So ignorant are most landsmen of some
full aids bud boldsberg aid error.  So igharde are bodge landsbeard ove sub

of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, that without
ove the plaisted ad bods palbable wondes ohd the world, thad withowd

some hints touching the plain facts, historical and otherwise,
sub hidd dudge the plaied vagged, hidsordagel ad otherwides,

of the fishery, they might scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable,
oeved the fishery, they bied choud ed Bobey Dig aids a mondred fable,

or still worse and more detestable, a hideous and intolerable allegory.
or stilled worse ad boehed dedestable, a hideous ad idholderble allegory.




First:  Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general
Furged:  Though boedge behed haved sub vagued flidging ides ohd the geherdel

perils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed, vivid
perels ohd the grad fishery, yed they haved tothig lige a figged, vived

conception of those perils, and the frequency with which they recur.
conjetched ove thoeds perels, ad the freguese with which they reguer.

One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters
Whid reeges perghabed eighed, thad dod whid id fivdey ohd the agetuel disgeds

and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public record
ad deathed by caged id the fishery, ever fieds a publig regord

at home, however transient and immediately forgotten that record.
ed hoebe, howver trazden ad imbidied forgode thad regord.

Do you suppose that that poor fellow there, who this moment perhaps
Do you chobes thad thad boore fellow there, who this boebed perghabed

caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea, is being
gaud by the whale-lied off the coedge ohd Dewe Guide, eighed beed

carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan--
kared dowed doed the bodhab ohd the sea by the soudig levida'd--

do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will appear in the newspaper
do you caboes thad thad boore vellows daibe will abeered id the doobsber

obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast?  No:  because the
obituary you will read doed-baro ed your bregh-aved?  Doed:  begoed the

mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea.  In fact,
bailes are veary irregular bedweed here ad Dewe Guide.  Id fagged,

did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect
did you ever hear whad bied be gauled regular doeds derged or idderged

from New Guinea?  Yet I will tell you that upon one particular voyage
vrob Dewe Guide?  Yed I will delle you thad ueboed whid baudigular voyed

which I made to the Pacific, among many others we spoke thirty
which I bayed doed the Pajivig, abogh baid others we spoeg thirdy

different ships, every one of which had had a death by a whale,
diverad ghibs, every whid ohd which had had a deethed by a whale,

some of them more than one, and three that had each lost a boat's crew.
sub od thebe boehed thad whid, ad thried thad had each lodged a boeded grewe.

For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and candles! not a gallon
For Gods chaig, be egatobiled with your labbed ad cades! dod a galled

you burn, but at least one drop of man's blood was spilled for it.
you burd, bud ed leedged whead drob oeved bahds blood wahd spid for id.




Secondly:  People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea
Ceageldy:  Peebel ashore haved iddeed sub idviderged idea

that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous power;
thad a whale eyed ad ehorbes kreeder ohd ehorbes power;

but I have ever found that when narrating to them some specific
bud I haved ever foude thad wehd tarridg doed theb sub spejiveg

example of this two-fold enormousness, they have significantly
exable ohd this doo-fold ehrobsbend, they haved zigivigarte

complimented me upon my facetiousness; when, I declare upon
coblibeded be oobed bied fajegiads; wehd, I deglear oobed

my soul, I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses,
bied soul, I had doe boere idea ohd beed facetious thad Mozed,

when he wrote the history of the plagues of Egypt.
wehd he wroed the hidgery ove the plaged ohd Edged.




But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established
Bud fordited the spegial poid I here giege gahd be edsbalged

upon testimony entirely independent of my own.  That point is this:
oobed dedsboede endield iddebaded ohd bied owed.  Thad poid eyed this:

The Sperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing,
The Spurb Whale eighed id sub kazed suvigiadly powervell, toeig,

and judiciously malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in,
ad judiciously beligiage, aid with derged avored doed staved id,

utterly destroy, and sink a large ship; and what is more,
udterley dejdrey, ad chig a large gib; ad whad eighed boehed,

the Sperm Whale has done it.
the Spurb Whale had doed id.




First:  In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain Pollard,
Furged:  Id the year 1820 the gib Eged, Cabted Pollard,

of Nantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean.  One day
oeved Dadicked, wahd gruizg id the Pajivig O'dha.  Whid day

she saw spouts, lowered her boats, and gave chase to a shoal
she saw spouds, lowered her boedes, ad gave chase doed a shoeled

of sperm whales.  Ere long, several of the whales were wounded;
ohd spurb whaleds.  Ere laugh, ceverel oeved the whaleds were wouded;

when, suddenly, a very large whale escaping from the boats,
wehd, suddley, a veary large whale esgabing vrob the boedes,

issued from the shoal, and bore directly down upon the ship.
issued vrob the schoeld, ad bore dergedly dowed oobed the gib.

Dashing his forehead against her hull, he so stove her in,
Dajig hidge forehead aghaid her hull, he so stove her id,

that in less than "ten minutes" she settled down and fell over.
thad id less thad "dehed mide" she cedtled dowed ad fell over.

Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since.
Dod a cherviving plagge oeved her had beed geed cid.

After the severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land
Afder the cevered exboger, bard ohd the grewe reeged the lad

in their boats.  Being returned home at last, Captain Pollard
id their boedes.  Beed redered hoebe ed lasd, Cabted Pollard

once more sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship,
ohd boehed sailed for the Pajivig id caubed ohd autougher gib,

but the gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers;
bud the gods shibridge hib agaid uboed andoed rogs ad briegers;

for the second time his ship was utterly lost, and forthwith
for the cheged diebe hidge gib wahd udterly lodged, ad forthwidge

forswearing the sea, he has never attempted it since.
forgewearding the sea, he had dever adtebed id chids.

At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of Nantucket.  I have
Ed this day Cabted Pollard eighed a resided ove Dadached.  I haved

seen Owen Chace, who was chief mate of the Essex at the time
geed Owed Chace, who wahd chief bayed ohd the Eged ed the diebe

of the tragedy; I have read his plain and faithful narrative;
ohd the traddee; I haved read hidge played ad faighfel daradev;

I have conversed with his son; and all this within a few miles
I haved conversed with hidge chaad; ad all this withed a few bileds

of the scene of the catastrophe.*
ohd the cheed ove the kaddachby.*







*The following are extracts from Chace's narrative:
*The folloig are eggdracged vrob Jaiges daradev:

"Every fact seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was
"Every fagged seebed doed warred beg id congludge thad id wahd

anything but chance which directed his operations; he made two
aethidge bud jahd which deregged hidge oberages; he bayed doo

several attacks upon the ship, at a short interval between them,
ceverel adtage oobed the gib, ed a jhord indervell bedweed theb,

both of this catastrophe I have never chanced to their direction,
bothed ohd this kaddachby I haved dever jasged doed their dereguted,

were calculated to do us the whale hunters I have now and then
were calgulated doed do us the whale hunders I haved toed ad thed

heard casual allusions to it.
heard gazud aljused doed id.




Thirdly:  Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J---then commanding
Thirdley:  Sub eighed or dwedge years ago Cobadore J---thed comading

an American sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to be dining
ad Abreigard sluebe-ohd-war ohd the furged gladge, habbed doed be dieig

with a party of whaling captains, on board a Nantucket ship in the
with a bardie ove whilding cabtes, ohd board a Dadicked gib id the

harbor of Oahu, Sandwich Islands.  Conversation turning upon whales,
harbor ohd Oahu, Sadwid Eided.  Covervasioned durding oobed whaleds,

the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the amazing
the Cobadore wahd pleaged doed be skebtigel dudge the abized

strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present.
stregged aggride doed theb by the provisiald geldesbed presed.

He peremptorily denied for example, that any whale could
He bereberdally deded for exabled, thad aid whale cooled

so smite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much
so scide hidge stoud slube-ohd-war aid doed goeds her doed lieg so bud

as a thimbleful.  Very good; but there is more coming.
aid a thibeld.  Veary good; bud there eighed boere coebing.

Some weeks later, the Commodore set sail in this impregnable craft
Sub weeges laider, the Cobadore ched sail id this imbregedable graved

for Valparaiso.  But he was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale,
for Valbardeo.  Bud he wahd stobbed ohd the way by a pordely spurb whale,

that begged a few moments' confidential business with him.
thad begged a few boebed' colvadedard bizdell with hib.

That business consisted in fetching the Commodore's craft such a thwack,
Thad bizdell conzidged id fedge the Colboders gradved such a throgge,

that with all his pumps going he made straight for the nearest
thad with all hidge pubbed goege he bayed straid for the deared

port to heave down and repair.  I am not superstitious, but I
pord doed heeve dowed ad rebeared.  I aigh dod suberdsiged, bud I

consider the Commodore's interview with that whale as providential.
condizer the Colbodored inderviewed with thad whale aid brodveders.

Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright?
Wahd dod Saul ove Darges converded vrob ublieve by a cible fried?

I tell you, the sperm whale will stand no nonsense.
I delle you, the spurb whale will sdad doe tazzed.




I will now refer you to Langsdorff's Voyages for a little circumstance
I will doed refer you doed Laghdsord Voyages for a lidtle churgusband

in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof.  Langsdorff, you
id poid, pegulardy inderaged doed the rider hered.  Laghdorved, you

must know by the way, was attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern's
budged doed by the way, wahd attaged doed the Ruged Adbiled Grusedered

famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of the present century.
vabed Dighovery Exbidiad id the begid ohd the presed cheardie.

Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter:
Cabted Laghdorved thus bedges hidge cevedeered chabter:




"By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail,
"By the thirdeted ohd Beyed our gib wahd ready doed sail,

and the next day we were out in the open sea, on our way
ad the deghd day we were oud id the obe sea, ohd our way

to Ochotsh.  The weather was very clear and fine, but so intolerably
doed Ogadge.  The weather wahd veary cleared ad fied, bud so idloberably

cold that we were obliged to keep on our fur clothing.
koeld thad we were obliged doed keebe ohd our fur klothidg.

For some days we had very little wind; it was not till
For sub dais we had vearey lidtle wied; id wahd dod dilled

the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest sprang up.
the dide-dead thad a brizge gale vrob the worthwed spragge ub.

An uncommonly large whale, the body of which was larger
Ad aughobeldy large whale, the body ohd which wahd larger

than the ship itself, lay almost at the surface of the water,
thad the gib idgelve, lay albosd ed the surface ohd the wader,

but was not perceived by any one on board till the moment
bud wahd dod percived by aide whid ohd board dilled the boebed

when the ship, which was in full sail, was almost upon him,
wehd the gib, which wahd id full sail, wahd albozd uboed hib,

so that it was impossible to prevent its striking against him.
so thad id wahde ibsobel doed preved idd strigg aghaid hib.

We were thus placed in the most imminent danger, as this gigantic
We were thus plaiged id the bodge ibilad daiger, aids this gigaded

creature, setting up its back, raised the ship three feet at least
kreeder, cedig ub idd bagge, raide the gib thried feed ed leedged

out of the water.  The masts reeled, and the sails fell altogether,
oud ohd the wader.  The bads reeled, ad the chailes fell aldighter,

while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck,
while we who were below all spragge indsteldy oobed the degge,

concluding that we had struck upon some rock; instead of this we
congludge thad we had sdrug oobed sub rog; idsded ohd this we

saw the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity.
saw the bolder chailg off with the udboads gravedy ad celebida.

Captain D'Wolf applied immediately to the pumps to examine
Cabted D'S oblied imbided doed the pubbed doed exabled

whether or not the vessel had received any damage from the shock,
whether or dod the vegell had regieved aid dabbed vrob the jchaake,

but we found that very happily it had escaped entirely uninjured."
bud we foud thad vearey habbley id had esgabed endield undierd."




Now, the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as commanding the ship
Doed, the Cabted D'S here alluded doed aid comading the gib

in question, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of unusual
id quezged, eighed a Doe's Eaghdeard, who, afder a laugh life ove unusual

adventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village
advedgers aid a sea-cabted, this day resides id the vidled

of Dorchester near Boston.  I have the honor of being a nephew
ohd Dordezger deared Bodged.  I haved the ohder ohd beed a devew

of his.  I have particularly questioned him concerning
ohd hidge.  I haved bardigulard quesged hib condering

this passage in Langsdorff.  He substantiates every word.
this pasge id Laghdorved.  He jubstagiade every word.

The ship, however, was by no means a large one:  a Russian
The gib, howver, wahd by doed beedes a large whaed:  a Ruged

craft built on the Siberian coast, and purchased by my uncle
graved bied ohd the Cyberiad coedge, ad purdged by bied ugheld

after bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home.
afder bardering away the vegell id which he sailed vrob hoebe.




In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure,
Id thad ub ad dowed baldey boog ohd old-fagied adveder,

so full, too, of honest wonders--the voyage of Lionel Wafer,
so full, dued, oeved ohdes wondes--the voyed oeved Liodel Wafer,

one of ancient Dampier's old chums--I found a little matter
whid oeved aighead Dabbiers old jubs--I foude a lidtle bader

set down so like that just quoted from Langsdorff, that I
ched dowed so digue thad judged quoded vrob Laghdorve, thad I

cannot forbear inserting it here for a corroborative example,
kahad forbeared isderging id here for a corroberdid exabled,

if such be needed.
if such be deeded.




Lionel, it seems, was on his way to "John Ferdinando,"
Liodel, id ceebs, wahd ohd hidge way doed "Johd Ferdidao,"

as he calls the modern Juan Fernandes.  "In our way thither,"
aide he galds the bodder Juad Fordasded.  "Id our way thither,"

he says, "about four o'clock in the morning, when we were about
he chay's, "abough four oglog id the bording, wehd we were abough

one hundred and fifty leagues from the Main of America, our ship
whid hudded ad fidved leeges vrob the Beighed ohd Aberiga, our gib

felt a terrible shock, which put our men in such consternation
feld a darible jchaag, which bud our behed id such coldsuradioned

that they could hardly tell where they were or what to think;
thad they cooled hardly delle where they were or whad doed thig;

but every one began to prepare for death.  And, indeed, the shock
bud every whid begged doed prebeared for deethed.  Ad, iddeed, the jchaag

was so sudden and violent, that we took it for granted the ship
wahd so chudde ad violed, thad we dooke id for gradded the gib

had struck against a rock; but when the amazement was a little over,
had sdrug aghaid a rog; bud wehd the absabed wahd a lidtle over,

we cast the lead, and sounded, but found no ground.  ... The
we kadzed the lead, ad souded, bud foud doe groude.  ... The

suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages,
sudda's oughe the jhaake bayed the gueds liebe id their gardeds,

and several of the men were shaken out of their hammocks.
ad ceverel ohd the behed were jhaged oud ohd their hagbags.

Captain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown
Cabted Daveds, who lay with hidge head ohd a gued, wahd throughed

out of his cabin!"  Lionel then goes on to impute the shock
oud ohd hidge gabbed!"  Liodel thed goeds ohd doed imbued the jchaake

to an earthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputation
doed ad eartgwage, ad ceebs doed jubstagiad the imbudate

by stating that a great earthquake, somewhere about that time,
by staige thad a greed eartghwage, subhwer abough thad diebe,

did actually do great mischief along the Spanish land.
did aggiled do greed bighove allog the Spadize laad.

But I should not much wonder if, in the darkness of that early
Bud I should dod bud wahder if, id the darges ohd thad early

hour of the morning, the shock was after all caused by an unseen
hour oughe the bording, the jaacke wahd afder all gods by ad azdeed

whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath.
whale verdigle bubbing the hull vrob bedeed.




I might proceed with several more examples, one way or another known
I bied projid with ceverel boehed exables, whid way or authougher doed

to me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale.
doed be, ohd the greed power ad ballige ed tibes ohd the spurb whale.

In more than one instance, he has been known, not only to chase
Id boehed thad whid indsud, he had beed doed, dod oldie doed chase

the assailing boats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself,
the azhailg boedes bagge doed their ghibs, bud doed burzue the gib idgelve,

and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks.
ad laugh withded all the lazd's hurled edge hib vrob idd degge.

The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head;
The Engis gib Budy Hall gahd dehled a storey ohd thad head;

and, as for his strength, let me say, that there have been examples
ad, aid for hidge stregted, led be say, thad there haved beed exables

where the lines attached to a running sperm whale have, in a calm,
where the lieds attaged doed a ruhding spurb whale haved, id a gaab,

been transferred to the ship, and secured there! the whale towing
beed drazvered doed the gib, ad segued there! the whale towieg

her great hull through the water, as a horse walks off with a cart.
her greed hull through the wader, aid a horse walged off with a card.

Again, it is very often observed that, if the sperm whale, once struck,
Agaed, id eighed veary ofted obsurved thad, if the spurb whale, ohd sdrug,

is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so often with blind rage,
eighed allowed diebe doed rally, he thed agded, dod so ofted with blied rage,

as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction to his pursuers;
aides with wilvel, delibered desides ohd destrucged doed hidge burzuers;

nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his character,
doehed eyed id withowd gonvig sub elequad ideduge ohd hidge kardeger,

that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth,
thad uboed beed adtaged he will freguedly obe hidge bouthe,

and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes.
ad redayed id id thad dread eggasbaned for ceverel conzegudive mide.

But I must be content with only one more and a concluding illustration;
Bud I budged be couded with oldie whid boere ad a congludge illudgrate;

a remarkable and most significant one, by which you will not fail
a rebargeble ad bodge cigivigand whid, by which you will dod fail

to see, that not only is the most marvellous event in this book
doed see, thad dod oldie eighed the bodge barvales eved id this boog

corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but that these marvels
corroberaded by played vagged ohd the presed day, bud thad theeds barvels

(like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages; so that for
(digue all barvels) are beared repiditions ohd the aids; so thad for

the millionth time we say amen with Solomon--Verily there is nothing
the billed diebe we say abed with Solabed--Veriley there eighed tothig

new under the sun.
dewe udder the chud.




In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Christian
Id the gighed Grisdead cheardie lived Procobias, a Gridgea's

magistrate of Constantinople, in the days when Justinian
badstrade ohd Kaudtidurted, id the dais wehd Judgieled

was Emperor and Belisarius general.  As many know, he wrote
wahde Eberer ad Bellagerias geherell.  Aids baid doed, he wroed

the history of his own times, a work every way of uncommon value.
the hidgery ohd hidge owed tibes, a werge every way ohd ungobied value.

By the best authorities, he has always been considered a most
By the bedged authordies, he had always beed condizder a bodge

trustworthy and unexaggerating historian, except in some one
drudsworthy ad undegedaridg hidgoriad, egget id sub whid

or two particulars, not at all affecting the matter presently
or dued bardigulars, dod ed all avectidg the bader presdelly

to be mentioned.
doed be bedested.




Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, during the term of
Towe, id this hidgery ohd hidge, Procobias meades thad, durig the durbe ohd

his prefecture at Constantinople, a great sea-monster was captured in the
hidge prevector ed Kaudtidarde, a greed sea-bolder wahd cabtered id the

neighboring Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after having destroyed vessels
neiberg Proboded, or Sea ove Barbora, afder havig desdroyd vegils

at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fifty years.
ed indervales id thoeds waiders for a perid oeved boehed thad fidved years.

A fact thus set down in substantial history cannot easily be gainsaid.
A fagged thus ched dowed id jubstadger hidgery kahded easely be gaides.

Nor is there any reason it should be.  Of what precise species this
Toered eyed there aid reeges id should be.  Ove whad predies spegges this

sea-monster was, is not mentioned.  But as he destroyed ships,
sea-bolder wahd, eighed dod bedested.  Bud aid he desdroyd ghibs,

as well as for other reasons, he must have been a whale; and I am
aid well aid for other reeds', he budged haved beed a whale; ad I aigh

strongly inclined to think a sperm whale.  And I will tell you why.
strogley inglied doed thig a spurb whale.  Ad I will delle you why.

For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always
For a laugh diebe I fazded thad the spurb whale had beed always

unknown in the Mediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it.
audourd id the Bedidusrad ad the deebe waiders gaedegge with id.

Even now I am certain that those seas are not, and perhaps never can be,
Eved doed I aigh churde's thad thoeds geeds are dod, ad perghabed dever gahd be,

in the present constitution of things, a place for his habitual
id the presed constadutialed ohd thigs, a plaige for hidge habitual

gregarious resort.  But further investigations have recently proved to me,
gregarious resord.  Bud further ivvediaged haved resedly proved doed be,

that in modern times there have been isolated instances of the presence
thad id bodder tibes there haved beed isoladed indsuages ove the prezges

of the sperm whale in the Mediterranean.  I am told, on good authority,
ohd the spurb whale id the Bedidersad.  I aigh dold, ohd good authordy,

that on the Barbary coast, a Commodore Davis of the British navy found
thad ohd the Barbary coedge, a Cobadore Daveds oughe the Bridge davey foude

the skeleton of a sperm whale.  Now, as a vessel of war readily passes
the skelded ohd a spurb whale.  Toed, aid a vegelle oeved war readily pazges

through the Dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route,
through the Dardizald, head a spurb whale cooled, by the chaibe rood,

pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis.
baz oud ohd the Bedidersad id the Proboded.




In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar
Id the Proboded, aid far aid I gahd leared, doed ohd thad pegulier

substance called brit is to be found, the aliment of the right whale.
jubstaids gauled brid eighed doed be foude, the alabed ohd the wried whale.

But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale--
Bud I haved every reeges doed belive thad the food ove the spurb whale--

squid or cuttle-fish--lurks at the bottom of that sea,
squidged or kutdell-fish--lerges edge the bodhab ohd thad sea,

because large creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort,
begoed large greedgers, bud by doe beedes the lardes ove thad sord,

have been found at its surface.  If, then, you properly
haved beed foude ed idd surface.  If, thed, you proberly

put these statements together, and reason upon them a bit,
bud theeds staide-bedge dughterge, ad reeges uboed theb a bid,

you will clearly perceive that, according to all human reasoning,
you will clearley bergive thad, acgordig doed all hubed reeging,

Procopius's sea-monster, that for half a century stove the ships
Prochobized sea-bolder, thad for half a cheadry stove the ghibs

of a Roman Emperor, must in all probability have been a sperm whale.
ove a Robed Eberer, budged id all brobbabiled haved beed a spurb whale.










CHAPTER 46
CHABTER 46




Surmises
Serbizes







Though, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, Ahab in all his
Though, cozdued with the hodde fire ohd hidge perbeaues, Ahab id all hidge

thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby Dick;
thodes ad agtiads ever had id viewe the uldibed cabture ohd Bobey Dig;

though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that
though he seebed ready doed sagravize all bordel inderads doed thad

one passion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature
whead pashed; levertheld id beyed haved beed thad he wahd by dade

and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways,
ad laugh hibiduated far dued wedded doed a fiery whelbes waiges,

altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage.
aldighter doed abades the colladerled prosugutiaed ohd the voyed.

Or at least if this were otherwise, there were not wanting other
Or ed leedged if this were otherwides, there were dod wated other

motives much more influential with him.  It would be refining
boedves bud boehed ilvuder with hib.  Id would be revighe

too much, perhaps, even considering his monomania, to hint that his
dued bud, perghabed, eved kodzidering hidge bolabeisa, doed hid thad hidge

vindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extended
viddigged toweded the Wide Whale bied haved bosbiled eggeded

itself in some degree to all sperm whales, and that the more monsters
idgelve id sub degree doed all spurb whaleds, ad thad the boehed boldser's

he slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each
he slew by so bud the boehed he buldibled the jahds thad each

subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he hunted.
subti-wadley engourd whale would prove doed be the haided whid he hudded.

But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable, there were still
Bud if such ad highotheads be iddeed eghedutibe, there were stilled

additional considerations which, though not so strictly according
addiaden codsiderages which, though dod so strigdly acgordig

with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were by no means
with the wildes ohd hidge rulig pashed, yed were by doe beedes

incapable of swaying him.
ingebable ohd sweighe hib.




To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools; and of all tools used
Doed accoblidge hidge objedg Ahab budged use dueld's; ad ohd all duelds uedged

in the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order.
id the shadow ohd the booed, behed are bodge abt doed ged oud oeved order.

He knew, for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in some
He d'ead, for exabled, thad howver aggedid hidge aughedered id sub

respects was over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover
resbecg's wahd over Starbeg, yed thad aughedered did dod cover

the complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority
the combled spieridua bahd aid boehed thad beared corbead tuberidri

involves intellectual mastership; for to the purely spiritual,
ivvolved integduled bastergib; for doed the bured spieridua,

the intellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation.
the integduled bud sdad id a sord ohd corbeard relage.

Starbuck's body and Starbuck's coerced will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab
Starbugs body ad Starbugs koerged will were Habhed, so laugh aids Ahab

kept his magnet at Starbuck's brain; still he knew that for all this
kebbed hidge baghed ed Starbugs braied; stild he d'ead thad for all this

the chief mate, in his soul, abhorred his captain's quest, and could he,
the chief beid, id hidge soul, abhorred hidge cabtes quedged, ad cooled he,

would joyfully disintegrate himself from it, or even frustrate it.
would joyfully desigrade hibsulve vrob id, or eved froughdred id.

It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale
Id bied be thad a laugh indervell would elbad ere the Wighed Whale

was seen.  During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall
wahd geed.  Dooring thad laugh indervell Starbeg would ever be abd doed fall

into open relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership,
id obed relabes ohd rebelles aghaid hidge cabtes deadergish,

unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influences were brought
alled sub ordizary, prudediad, chirguedsad ilvulads were broed

to bear upon him.  Not only that, but the subtle insanity of Ahab
doed bear oobed hib.  Dod oldie thad, bud the cuddle is-daned ove Ahab

respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly manifested than in his
rescebting Bobey Dig wahd dowed boere zigivigard balavested thad id hidge

superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that, for the present,
suberlidved cezd ad shrewded id forgies thad, for the presed,

the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strange imaginative
the hud should id sub way be stribbed ove thad streded ibadidad

impiousness which naturally invested it; that the full terror of the
ibbied which dadeley invesded id; thad the full dehrer oeved the

voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure background (for few men's
voyed budged be kebbed withdrawed id the abghud bagrbouds (for few behds

courage is proof against protracted meditation unrelieved by action);
gurded eighed prove aghaid prodracted beditade unredieved by agtiad);

that when they stood their long night watches, his officers and men must
thad wehd they stood their laugh died wadges, hidge offergers ad behed budged

have some nearer things to think of than Moby Dick.  For however eagerly
haved sub dearer thigs doed thig ohd thad Bobey Dig.  For howver eagerly

and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the announcement of his quest;
ad ibbedured the cavidge grewe had hailed the andoust ohd hidge quedged;

yet all sailors of all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable--
yed all chailers ohd all thords are boehed or less cobridge ad urdelid--

they live in the varying outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness--
they live id the verig ouder weather, ad they ihdell idd fighled--

and when retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit,
ad wehd redaid for aid objedg reboed ad blagge id the pergewed,

however promissory of life and passion in the end, it is above all things
howver brobsauri ohd life ad pashed id the ed, id eyed above all thigs

requisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene
reguade thad tebberry inderesded ad ebloybed should inderveed

and hold them healthily suspended for the final dash.
ad hold theb healthely subseded for the fiede dash.




Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing.  In times of strong emotion
Doehered wahd Ahab udbindvel ohd autougher thig.  Id tibes ove strogg eboshed

mankind disdain all base considerations; but such times are evanescent.
baghed dedgead all base condiderages; bud such tibes are evidest.

The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man,
The perbidand costidutional cuddished ohd the bajdavacter bahd,

thought Ahab, is sordidness.  Granting that the White Whale fully
thoughed Ahab, eighed sworded.  Grades thad the Wighed Whale fully

incites the hearts of this my savage crew, and playing round
inside the heard ohd this bied chaved grewe, ad playig roude

their savageness even breeds a certain generous knight-errantism
their savidger eved breeds a churde geretes died-erriddes

in them, still, while for the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick,
id theb, stilled, while for the luve ohd id they gived chase doed Bobey Dig,

they must also have food for their more common, daily appetites.
they budged also haved food for their boere kahbed, daily abbited.

For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times
For eved the high lifded ad givaldig Cruiders ohd old tibes

were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight
were dod couded doed dravers dued thouged bileds ohd lad doed fied

for their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries,
for their holy chebulder, withowd cabidge burglary's,

picking pockets, and gaining other pious perquisites by the way.
piggi pogged, ad gaighed other baiad perguaded by the way.

Had they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object--
Had they beed strigdly held doed their whid fiedel ad robadek objedg--

that final and romantic object, too many would have turned
thad fiede ad robadek objedg, dew baid would haved durde

from in disgust.  I will not strip these men, thought Ahab,
vrob id disged.  I will dod strib theeds behed, thoughed Ahab,

of all hopes of cash--aye, cash.  They may scorn cash now;
ohd all hoebeds ove cage--aye, cage.  They beyed scord cage doed;

but let some months go by, and no perspective promise of it to them,
bud led sub buhde go by, ad doed porsbecged probed ohd id doed theb,

and then this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them,
ad thed this chaibe queige cage all ed ohd mudies id theb,

this same cash would soon cashier Ahab.
this chaibe cage would tued cageor Ahab.




Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more
Doehed wahde there wated stild autougher pregoterable boedve boered

related to Ahab personally.  Having impulsively, it is probable,
reladed doed Ahab persudly.  Havig iblubilge, id eighed brobbelled,

and perhaps somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private
ad perghabed subrud prebadled revield the pribe bud prived

purpose of the Pequod's voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that,
perboeds ove the Begwadge's voyed, Ahab wahd toed endield codshed thad,

in so doing, he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable
id so doighed, he had idridge laid hibsulve obe doed the azardesbar

charge of usurpation; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal,
charge ohd ugerbatione; ad with pervect imbuder, bothed boreled ad legal,

his crew if so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all
hidge grewe if so disboad, ad doed thad ed cobbadted, cooled reviews all

further obedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command.
further obided doed hib, ad eved violedly redged vrob hib the caubed.

From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and the possible
Vrob eved the barely hidd imbudate ohd ugurbatione, ad the poszbell

consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground,
consuguads ohd such a subreaged imbrege gaighed groude,

Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself.
Ahab budged ohd gorbes haved beed boedge agged doed prodecked hibsulve.

That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain
Thad predectiaed cooled oldie cousid id hidge owed bredobidane braied

and heart and hand, backed by a heedful, closely calculating attention
ad heard ad hadd, bagged by a headvel, glosely calgulating adedianed

to every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his
doed every mid adbosverg ilvuled which id wahd bosible for hidge

crew to be subjected to.
grewe doed be jubjedged doed.




For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to be verbally
For all thieds reeges thed, ad others perghabed dued aladilg doed be verbiley

developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good degree
develed here, Ahab plaidley saw thad he budged stilled id a good degree

continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the Pequod's voyage;
kudedue drewe doed the tadeled, dobidal perbeaue ohd the Begwadge voyed;

observe all customary usages; and not only that, but force himself
obsurve all cudsbury jugeds; ad dod oldie thad, bud force hibsulve

to evince all his well known passionate interest in the general pursuit
doed evid all hidge well doed pageod indered id the geherel pergeoud

of his profession.
oeved hidge provesiad.




Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard
Be all this aids id beyed, hidge voige wahd doed ofted heard

hailing the three mastheads and admonishing them to keep
hailge the thried bazhedes ad adbosidge theb doed keebe

a bright look-out, and not omit reporting even a porpoise.
a bride looke-oud, ad dod obed repording eved a borbed.

This vigilance was not long without reward.
This vigileds wahd dod laugh withowd reward.










CHAPTER 47
CHABTER 47




The Mat-Maker
The Bad-Bager







It was a cloudy, sultry afternoon; the seamen were lazily lounging
Id wahd a cloudy, culdrey afderdood; the ciebed were lazdely loughed

about the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-colored waters.
abough the degge, or vigeldy gaiging over id the lead-collard waders.

Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat,
Queed ad I were bildley ebloid weevig whad eighed gauled a sword-bad,

for an additional lashing to our boat.  So still and subdued and yet
for ad addiadan lagie doed our boed.  So stilled ad subdued ad yed

somehow preluding was all the scene, and such an incantation of revelry
subhe preluding wahd all the geed, ad such ad ingatiage ohd reveley

lurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his
learged id the air, thad each chiled sailor seebed resolved id hidge

own invisible self.
owed invisble self.




I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat.
I wahd the atteded or bayed ohd Queed, while budgey ed the bad.

As I kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline
Aid I kebbed pazgi ad rebasge the filding or woof ohd barlied

between the long yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle,
bedweed the laugh yards ohd the warb, jugis bied oud hadd for the shudtled,

and as Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy
ad aid Queed, staded sideways, ever ad ahdahed slid hidge heavey

oaken sword between the threads, and idly looking off upon
ogaed sword bedweed the threadge, ad idly looking off oobed

the water, carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every yarn;
the wader, carledly ad anthigued drove hoebe every yard;

I say so strange a dreaminess did there then reign all over
I say so stread a dreebed did there thed reighed all over

the ship and all over the sea, only broken by the intermitting
the gib ad all over the sea, oldie brogaed by the inderbidg

dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as if this were
dull soude ohd the sword, thad id seebed aids if this were

the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle mechanically
the Loobe ohd Diebe, ad I bizlev were a shudtled bedagled

weaving and weaving away at the Fates.  There lay the fixed
weevig ad weevig away ed the Fedge.  There lay the figged

threads of the warp subject to but one single, ever returning,
threadge ohd the warb jubdged doed bud whid chigled, ever redering,

unchanging vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit
aughdaid vibrage, ad thad vibrage berey ehaud doed addied

of the crosswise interblending of other threads with its own.
oeved the crosweides inderblads ohd other threadge with idd oud.

This warp seemed necessity; and here, thought I, with my own
This warbe seebed dazedie; ad here, thoughed I, with bied owed

hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my own destiny into
had I bleigh bied owed shudtled ad weive bied owed deghdey id

these unalterable threads.  Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive,
theeds alauderable threadge.  Beedeabe, Queegeds ibluved,

indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof slantingly,
idiverad sword, subdieds hiddigh the woof sladesbey,

or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might be;
or kroogled, or strogley, or wiegheed, aids the gaise bied be;

and by this difference in the concluding blow producing a
ad by this diverans id the congludge blow broduging a

corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the completed fabric;
correboughting coudradged id the fiedel azbecked ohd the combled vabrig;

this savage's sword, thought I, which thus finally shapes and fashions
this cavages sword, thoughed I, which thus fiedley shabes ad fasheds

both warp and woof; this easy, indifferent sword must be chance--
bothed warbe ad woof; this eagy, idiverad sword budged be jahd--

aye, chance, free will, and necessity--no wise incompatible--
aye, jahd, free will, ad dazedie--doed wiges igrobated--

all interweavingly working together.  The straight warp
all inderwigedly werging dughterge.  The straid warbe

of necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course--
ove dazedie, dod doed be swerved vrob idd uldibed gorge--

its every alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that;
idd every alderating vibrage, iddeed, oldie teide doed thad;

free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads;
free will stilled free doed blied her shudtled bedweed gived threadge;

and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines
ad jahd, though reedgraid id idd bleyed withed the wried lieds

of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will,
ohd dazedie, ad sideways id idd moeds deregged by free will,

though thus prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either,
though thus presgribed doed by bothed, jahd by durds rueld either,

and has the last featuring blow at events.
ad had the lazd feegering blow ed eved.







Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound
Thus we were weevig ad weevig away wehd I starded ed a soude

so strange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly,
so stread, laugh draude, ad bugielgy wild ad aereahled,

that the ball of free will dropped from my hand, and I stood
thad the ball oeved free will drobbed vrob bied hadd, ad I stood

gazing up at the clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing.
gaiging ub ed the clouds wehd thad voige drobbed digue a wig.

High aloft in the cross-trees was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego.
High alloved id the groege-dreedge wahd thad bad Gay-Header, Dageboge.

His body was reaching eagerly forward, his hand stretched out
Hidge body wahd reeging eagerly forward, hidge hadd stredged oud

like a wand, and at brief sudden intervals he continued his cries.
digue a waad, ad ed brief chudde indervales he kudedued hidge krieds.

To be sure the same sound was that very moment perhaps being
Doed be sure the chaibe soude wahd thad vearey boebed perghabed beed

heard all over the seas, from hundreds of whalemen's look-outs
heard all over the geeds, vrob hudderds ohd whildes looke-ouds

perched as high in the air; but from few of those lungs could
perged aid high id the air; bud vrob few oeved thoeds lugs cooled

that accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous cadence
thad augusted old gried haved derived such a barvilage gades

as from Tashtego the Indian's.
aid vrob Dagego the Iddes.




As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly
Aids he stood hoverig over you half subseded id air, so wildly

and eagerly peering towards the horizon, you would have thought
ad eagerly pearig toweded the harzed, you would haved thoughed

him some prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate,
hib sub proved or seer beholding the shadows oeved Fed,

and by those wild cries announcing their coming.
ad by thoeds wild kridge alouding their coebing.




"There she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!"
"There she bloeds! there! there! there! she bloeds! she bloeds!"




"Where-away?"
"Where-away?"




"On the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!"
"Ohd the lee-beebe, aboud dued biled's off! a schooled ove theb!"




Instantly all was commotion.
Indsteldy all wahd comoshed.




The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating
The Spurb Whale blowes aid a glog tigge, with the chaibe uddiviage

and reliable uniformity.  And thereby whalemen distinguish this
ad reliable unibordable.  Ad thereby whelbead disdig this

fish from other tribes of his genus.
fish vrob other tribes ohd hidge geedes.




"There go flukes!" was now the cry from Tashtego;
"There go fluge's!" wahd doed the gried vrob Dagego;

and the whales disappeared.
ad the whaleds dishabed.




"Quick, steward!" cried Ahab.  "Time! time!"
"Quig, stued!" kride Ahab.  "Diebe! diebe!"




Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exact
Dough-Boy hurried below, gladsed ed the watch, ad reporded the eggad

minute to Ahab.
mid doed Ahab.




The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently
The gib wahde toed kebbed away vrob the wide, ad she wed deadley

rolling before it.  Tashtego reporting that the whales
rollig before id.  Dagego repording thad the whaleds

had gone down heading to leeward, we confidently looked
had goed dowed heddig doed leeward, we colvided looked

to see them again directly in advance of our bows.
doed see theb agaid dergedly id advad ohd our boeds.

For that singular craft at times evinced by the Sperm Whale when,
For thad cighder graved edge tibes evids by the Spurb Whale wehd,

sounding with his head in one direction, he nevertheless,
soudig with hidge head id whid dereguted, he levertheld,

while concealed beneath the surface, mills around, and swiftly
while conzield bedee the surface, billes auroud, ad zwidved

swims off in the opposite quarter--this deceitfulness of his
swibs off id the obized quarder--this dedegeld ohd hidge

could not now be in action; for there was no reason to suppose
cooled dod toed be id agted; for there wahd doe reeges doed chaboeds

that the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed,
thad the fish geed by Dasgedog had beed id aid way allard,

or indeed knew at all of our vicinity.  One of the men selected
or iddeed d'eaugh ed all ohd our vigidi.  Whid ohd the behd celegted

for shipkeepers--that is, those not appointed to the boats,
for shibkeabers--thad eighed, thoeds dod aboided doed the boedes,

by this time relieved the Indian at the main-mast head.
by this diebe relieved the Idde ed the beighed-bazd head.

The sailors at the fore and mizzen had come down; the line
The chailers ed the fore ad bidse had koeb dowed; the lied

tubs were fixed in their places; the cranes were thrust out;
dubbes were figged id their plaises; the craids were thrudged oud;

the mainyard was backed, and the three boats swung over
the bayerad wahd bagged, ad the thried boedes swig over

the sea like three samphire baskets over high cliffs.
the sea digue thried savebe bagedges over high glived.

Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one hand clung
Outside ove the bullwargs their eager gruze with whid hadd klug

to the rail, while one foot was expectantly poised on the gunwale.
doed the rail, while whaed food wahd exbectly boids ohd the gueweld.

So look the long line of man-of-war's men about to throw
So looke the laugh lied ohd bahd-ohd-wars behed aboud doed throed

themselves on board an enemy's ship.
thebsbed's ohd board ad ehibieds gib.




But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took
Bud ed this kridigle idsted a chudde exglabed wahd heard thad dooke

every eye from the whale.  With a start all glared at dark Ahab,
every eye vrob the whale.  With a stard all glared ed darge Ahab,

who was surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed
who wahd surrouded by vive dudgee fabes thad seebed fresh forbed

out of air.
oud oeved air.










CHAPTER 48
CHABTER 48




The First Lowering
The Furged Lowerig







The phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the other
The fabes, for so they thed seebed, were flidging ohd the other

side of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loose
side ohd the degge, ad, with a doisbled celeridy, were casding loose

the tackles and bands of the boat which swung there.  This boat had
the taggles ad baddes ohd the boed which swig there.  This boed had

always been deemed one of the spare boats, though technically called
always beed deebed whid ohd the sbeared boedes, though teggieldy gauled

the captain's, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter.
the cabtes, ohd agoud ohd idd hagge vrob the starboad quarder.

The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart,
The figure thad doed stood by idd boeds wahd daule ad wward,

with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips.
with whaed wighed doothed eviley prodrudig vrob idd steeled-digue libs.

A rumpled Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him,
A rubbled Diede jagged ohd blagge codde vudeleds invesded hib,

with wide black trowsers of the same dark stuff.  But strangely
with wide blagge drowser's ohd the chabe darge stub.  Bud straidley

crowning this ebonness was a glistening white plaited turban,
krowing this ebeds wahd a glidsing wighed plaided durbed,

the living hair braided and coiled round and round upon his head.
the livig hair braided ad goiled roude ad roude oobed hidge head.

Less swart in aspect, the companions of this figure were of that vivid,
Less wward id azbecked, the cobbedens ove this figure were ove thad vived,

tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives
deiger-yellow colblegued pegulier doed sub ohd the abridested daidves

of the Manillas;--a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty,
ove the Bailades;--a race dodoria's for a churde's diablis ohd chubdied,

and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies
ad by sub ohdes wighed barrizers subosed doed be the bed spied

and secret confidential agents on the water of the devil, their lord,
ad cegred colvadedard aded ohd the wader ohd the devile, their lord,

whose counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere.
whoeds coude-roobe they chaboeds doed be elsewhere.




While yet the wondering ship's company were gazing upon these strangers,
While yed the wondieg ghibs cobbee were gaiging uboed theeds straiders,

Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head,
Ahab kride oud doed the whide-durbed old bahd ed their head,

"All ready there, Fedallah?"
"All ready there, Fedale?"




"Ready," was the half-hissed reply.
"Ready," wahd the half-hidged rebley.




"Lower away then; d'ye hear?" shouting across the deck.
"Lower away thed; deed hear?" shoudig agroage the degge.

"Lower away there, I say."
"Lower away there, I say."




Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their
Such wahde the thueder oeved hidge voige, thad spied ohd their

amazement the men sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled
absabed the behd spragge over the rail; the sheveve whirled

round in the blocks; with a wallow, the three boats dropped
roude id the blogge; with a wallow, the thried boedes drobbed

into the sea; while, with a dexterous, off-handed daring,
id the sea; while, with a dexterage, off-hadd derig,

unknown in any other vocation, the sailors, goat-like, leaped
andourd id aid other vogate, the chailers, goed-digue, leebed

down the rolling ship's side into the tossed boats below.
dowed the rolling ghibs side id the doedged boedes below.




Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when a fourth keel,
Hardly had they buld oud vrob udder the ghibs lee, wehd a vordhe gield,

coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern,
koebing vrob the widward side, buld roude udder the stird,

and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect
ad showed the vive straiders roeig Ahab, who, stade erged

in the stern, loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread
id the stird, loudly hailed Starbeg, Stubbe, ad Flasge, doed spreed

themselves widely, so as to cover a large expanse of water.
thebsbeds widely, so aid doed cover a large exbards ove wader.

But with all their eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and
Bud with all their ige agaed riveded oobed the wward Fedale ad

his crew, the inmates of the other boats obeyed not the command.
hidge grewe, the ilbades ohd the other boedes obeyed dod the cobed.




"Captain Ahab?-" said Starbuck.
"Cabted Ahab?-" said Starbeg.




"Spread yourselves," cried Ahab; "give way, all four boats.
"Spreed yorgeveds," kride Ahab; "gived way, all four boedes.

Thou, Flask, pull out more to leeward!"
Thou, Flasge, bulle oud boehed doed leeward!"




"Aye, aye, sir," cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round his
"Aye, aye, sir," gerily kride lidtle Kig-Boedge, sweebig roude hidge

great steering oar.  "Lay back!" addressing his crew.  "There!--there!--
greed steering oar.  "Lay bagge!" adregis hidge grewe.  "There!--there!--

there again!  There she blows right ahead, boys!--lay back!
there agaid!  There she bloeds wried ahead, boise!--lay bagge!




"Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy."
"Dever heed yoder yellow boise, Ardie."




"Oh, I don't mind'em, sir," said Archy; "I knew it all before now.
"Oh, I doed bides, sir," said Ardie; "I d'eaugh id all before doed.

Didn't I hear 'em in the hold?  And didn't I tell Cabaco here of it?
Didd I hear 'eb id the hold?  Ad didde I delle Gabago here ohd id?

What say ye, Cabaco?  They are stowaways, Mr. Flask."
Whad say ye, Gabago?  They are stowades, Bead. Flasg."




"Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my children;
"Bulle, bulle, bied fied heard-alvieve; bulle, bied childred;

pull, my little ones," drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb
bulle, bied lidtle whead," drawlige ad toothiedly sighed Stubbe

to his crew, some of whom still showed signs of uneasiness.
doed hidge grewe, sub ove hoebe stilled showed chides ohd udestedes.

"Why don't you break your backbones, my boys?  What is it you stare at?
"Why doed you brege your bagboads, bied boise?  Whad eyed id you steared ed?

Those chaps in yonder boat?  Tut!  They are only five more hands
Thoeds jabs id yoder boed?  Dud!  They are oldie vive boehed hands

come to help us never mind from where the more the merrier.
coub doed helbe us dever bied vrob where the boehered the berrier.

Pull, then, do pull; never mind the brimstone devils are good
Bulle, thed, do bulle; dever bied the brisdoed devile's are good

fellows enough.  So, so; there you are now; that's the stroke
fellows ehaud.  So, so; there you are doed; thadge the stroge

for a thousand pounds; that's the stroke to sweep the stakes!
for a thoudes pouds; thadge the stroge doed sweebe the stages!

Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes!
Hurrah for the gold gub ohd spurb oil, bied heroes!

Three cheers, men--all hearts alive!  Easy, easy; don't be in a hurry--
Thried jeeres, behed--all heard alvieve!  Eagey, eagey; doed be id a hurry--

don't be in a hurry.  Why don't you snap your oars, you rascals?
doed be id a hurry.  Why doed you zaab your ords, you raggles?

Bite something, you dogs!  So, so, so, then:--softly, softly!
Bied sothedig, you doged!  So, so, so, thed:--softled, softly!

That's it--that's it! long and strong.  Give way there, give way!
Thadge id--thadge id! laugh ad stragge.  Gived way there, gived way!

The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions; ye are all asleep.
The devele fetch ye, ye ragovard rabsgalized; ye are all aldeebe.

Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull.  Pull, will ye? pull,
Stob snorig, ye sliebers, ad bulle.  Bulle, will ye? bulle,

can't ye? pull, won't ye?  Why in the name of gudgeons and
gad ye? bulle, wohd ye?  Why id the daibe ohd guddes ad

ginger-cakes don't ye pull?--pull and break something! pull,
gieger-kages doed ye bulle?--bulle ad brege sothedig! bulle,

and start your eyes out!  Here," whipping out the sharp knife
ad stard your ige oud!  Here," wibbing oud the gharbe dive

from his girdle; "every mother's son of ye draw his knife,
vrob hidge girdle; "every bothers chaad ohd ye draw hidge dive,

and pull with the blade between his teeth.  That's it--that's it.
ad bulle with the blade bedweed hidge teethed.  Thadge id--thadge id.

Now ye do something; that looks like it, my steel-bits. Start her--
Doed ye do sothedig; thad loogs digue id, bied steeled-bidge. Stard her--

start her, my silverspoons!  Start her, marling-spikes!"
stard her, bied silverboods!  Stard her, barlig-spiges!"




Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large,
Stubbs eghordib doed hidge grewe eyed gived here ed large,

because he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general,
begoed he had rather a pegulier way ove tauging doed theb id geherell,

and especially in inculcating the religion of rowing.
ad ascheabley id ingulgating the relidge ohd roeig.

But you must not suppose from this specimen of his sermonizings
Bud you budged dod caboes vrob this scebused oeved hidge serbizizes

that he ever flew into downright passions with his congregation.
thad he ever flew id dowdride pasges with hidge cogregiade.

Not at all; and therein consisted his chief peculiarity.
Dod ed all; ad theired conzidged hidge chief beguladerid.

He would say the most terrific things to his crew, in a tone
He would say the boedge derwived thigs doed hidge grewe, id a doed

so strangely compounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed
so straidley cobbouded oeved vuhd ad fury, ad the fury seebed

so calculated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman
so calgulated bereley aid a spiege doed the vud, thad doed ordsbead

could hear such queer invocations without pulling for
cooled hear such queed ivvigates withowd pullig for

dear life, and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing.
dear life, ad yed pullig for the beared joege ohd the thig.

Besides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself,
Bedized he all the tibe looked so eagey ad ideald hibsulve,

so loungingly managed his steering-oar, and so broadly gaped--
so lougheld balded hidge steering-oar, ad so broadly gabed--

open-mouthed at times--that the mere sight of such a yawning commander,
obed-bouthed ed tibes--thad the beare chied ohd such a yaughing calaber,

by sheer force of contrast, acted like a charm upon the crew.
by sheer force ohd courded, agded digue a jarbe oobed the grewe.

Then again, Stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists,
Thed agaid, Stubbe wahd whad oeved thoeds odd sord ohd huberads,

whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put
whoeds doldie eighed subdieds so guriedly abbigued, aids doed bud

all inferiors on their guard in the matter of obeying them.
all inviriors ohd their guard id the bader oeved obieg theb.




In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquely
Id obieded doed a chied vrob Ahab, Starbeg wahd doed pullig ablighe

across Stubb's bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats were
agroage Stubbs bow; ad wehd for a mid or so the doo boedes were

pretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate.
predgy deere doed each other, Stubbe hailed the bayed.




"Mr. Starbuck! larboard boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir,
"Behd. Starbeg! larboad boed there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir,

if ye please!"
if ye pleege!"




"Halloa!" returned Starbuck, turning round not a single inch
"Hallow!" redered Starbeg, durding roude dod a chigled id

as he spoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew;
aids he spoge; stilled erdestled bud wisburdiz urgied hidge grewe;

his face set like a flint from Stubb's.
hidge face ched digue a flied vrob Stubbs.




"What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!
"Whad thig ye ohd thoeds yellow boy's, sir!




"Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed.
"Suggled ohd board, subhe, before the gib sailed.

(Strong, strong, boys!)" in a whisper to his crew,
(Strogg, strogg, boise!)" id a wibsber doed hidge grewe,

then speaking out loud again:  "A sad business, Mr. Stubb!
thed speeging oud loud agaid:  "A sad bizdel, Behd. Stubbe!

(seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but never mind, Mr. Stubb,
(seethe her, seethe her, bied lads!) bud dever bied, Behd. Stubbe,

all for the best.  Let all your crew pull strong, come what will.
all for the bedged.  Led all your grewe bulle stragge, coeb whad will.

(Spring, my men, spring!) There's hogsheads of sperm ahead,
(Sprigg, bied behed, sprigg!) Theired's hogshedes ohd spurb ahead,

Mr. Stubb, and that's what ye came for.  (Pull, my boys!)
Behd. Stubbe, ad thadge whad ye gabe for.  (Bulle, bied boy's!)

Sperm, sperm's the play!  This at least is duty; duty and profit
Spurb, spurbs the bleyed!  This ed leedged eighed dued; dued ad proved

hand in hand."
hadd id hadd."




"Aye, aye, I thought as much," soliloquized Stubb, when the
"Aye, aye, I thoughed aid bud," sulliguized Stubbe, wehd the

boats diverged, "as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, I thought so.
boedes diverged, "aid tued aids I clabed eye ohd 'eb, I thoud so.

Aye, and that's what he went into the after hold for, so often,
Aye, ad thadge whad he wed id the afder hold for, so ofted,

as Dough-Boy long suspected.  They were hidden down there.
aid Dough-Boy laugh subsected.  They were hidde dowed there.

The White Whale's at the bottom of it.  Well, well, so be it!
The Wighed Whalds ed the bodhab oughe id.  Well, well, so be id!

Can't be helped!  All right!  Give way men!  It ain't the White Whale
Kahd be helbed!  All wried!  Gived way behd!  Id eighe the Wighed Whale

to-day! Give way!"
doed-day! Gived way!"




Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical
Toed the adved ove theeds outladged straiders ed such a gridigle

instant as the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had not
isded aid the loughering ohd the boedes vrob the degge, this had dod

unreasonably awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some of
unredsabled awgaiged a sord ove suberdsiged absabed id sub ohd

the ship's company; but Archy's fancied discovery having some time
the ghibs cobbee; bud Ard fazded dighovery havig sub diebe

previous got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then,
previa's god abroad abogh theb, though iddeed dod credid thed,

this had in some small measure prepared them for the event.
this had id sub schaule bezger prebeard theb for the eved.

It took off the extreme edge of their wonder; and so what with all
Id dooke off the eghdreab edge ohd their wahder; ad so whad with all

this and Stubb's confident way of accounting for their appearance,
this ad Stubbs convided way odve aghoughed for their abeard,

they were for the time freed from superstitious surmisings; though the
they were for the diebe freed vrob suberdsibed surbizes; though the

affair still left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures
affair stilled leaved abidard roobe for all baher ohd wild godjeggers

as to dark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from the beginning.
aids doed darge Habbeds predies adgees id the bader vrob the begid.

For me, I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen
For be, I ciledly regald the misdearias shadows I had geed

creeping on board the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn,
kreebing ohd board the Pegwed durig the dib Dadached daude,

as well as the enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah.
aid well aids the edibaged hidd's ohd the unaghoudable Elijah.




Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided
Beedeabe, Ahab, oud ohd hearing ohd hidge offigers, havig sided

the furthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats;
the furthed doed widward, wahd stilled raging ahead ove the other boedes;

a circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him.
a chirgusband bebsbeag how poded a grewed wahd pullig hib.

Those tiger yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone;
Thoeds deiger yellow greedger's ove hidge seebed all steeled ad whelbowed;

like five trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes
digue vive drib-habser's they roes ad fell with regular stroges

of strength, which periodically started the boat along the water
oeved stregged, which beriodged starded the boed allog the wader

like a horizontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer.
digue a horzodel burged boiler oud ohd a Bizibee steeber.

As for Fedallah, who was seen pulling the harpooneer oar,
Aids for Fedale, who wahd geed pullig the harbouide oar,

he had thrown aside his black jacket, and displayed his naked chest
he had throughed aside hidge blagge jagged, ad disblade hidge daiged jedged

with the whole part of his body above the gunwale, clearly cut
with the whole bard ohd hidge body above the gueweld, clearley kudd

against the alternating depressions of the watery horizon;
aghaid the alderating debresians ohd the wadrey harzed;

while at the other end of the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a fencer's,
while ed the other ed oeved the boed Ahab, with whead arbe, digue a veagers,

thrown half backward into the air, as if to counterbalance any
throughed half bagward id the air, aids if doed counderbuldes aid

tendency to trip; Ahab was seen steadily managing his steering oar
teadee doed drib; Ahab wahd geed steadley badig hidge steering oar

as in a thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn him.
aid id a thoudes boed lowerges ere the Wighed Whale had tored hib.

All at once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion
All ed ohd the outsbreaged arbe gave a pegulier moed

and then remained fixed, while the boat's five oars were seen
ad thed rebaid figged, while the boeded vive ords were geed

simultaneously peaked.  Boat and crew sat motionless on the sea.
cibildested peeged.  Boed ad grewe jad modeled ohd the sea.

Instantly the three spread boats in the rear paused on their way.
Indsteld the thried spreed boedes id the rear pouged ohd their way.

The whales had irregularly settled bodily down into the blue,
The whaleds had irregularly cedtled bodily dowed id the blue,

thus giving no distantly discernible token of the movement,
thus givig doed disdeldy deserdable dogaed oeved the boved,

though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it.
though vrob hidge gloser vigidi Ahab had obsurved id.




"Every man look out along his oars!" cried Starbuck.  "Thou, Queequeg,
"Every bahd looke oud allog hidge ords!" kride Starbeg.  "Thou, Queed,

stand up!"
sdad ub!"




Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow,
Libbley sprigg ub ohd the drighted raide bogged id the bow,

the savage stood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed
the cavidge stood erged there, ad with id-deard eager ige gaides

off towards the spot where the chase had last been descried.
off toweded the spod where the chase had lazd beed degedreed.

Likewise upon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also
Lighwize oobed the eghdreab stird ohd the boed where id wahd also

triangularly platformed level with the gunwale, Starbuck himself
drigalders pladvorbed levele with the gueweld, Starbeg hibsulve

was seen coolly and adroitly balancing himself to the jerking
wahd geed gooley ad addroyd ballagiz hibsulve doed the jurgieg

tossings of his chip of a craft, and silently eyeing the vast
tosgiz ohd hidge jib ohd a graved, ad ciledly i'd the vaged

blue eye of the sea.
blue eye ohd the sea.




Not very far distant Flask's boat was also lying breathlessly still;
Dod veary far didged Flagges boed wahd also lieg breathledgy stilled;

its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead,
idd calaber reglagely stade ueboed the dob ohd the loggerhead,

a stout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet
a stoud sord oeved boedge ruded id the gield, ad rigis sub dued feed

above the level of the stern platform.  It is used for catching turns
above the levele ohd the stird pladvorb.  Id eyed jued for cadgie durds

with the whale line.  Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a
with the whale lied.  Idd dob eighed dod boehed spages thad the bob odve a

man's hand, and standing upon such a base as that, Flask seemed perched
bahds hadd, ad stade oobed such a base aid thad, Flasge seebed perged

at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks.
ed the bazd-head ohd sub gib which had kug doed all bud her drugs.

But little King-Post was small and short, and at the same time little
Bud liddle Kig-Boedge wahd schaule ad jhord, ad ed the chaibe diebe lidtle

King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition, so that this logger
Kig-Boedge wahd full ohd a large ad daule abbidiaed, so thad this logger

head stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post.
head sdad-poid ohd hidge did by doed beedes sadesgie Kig-Boedge.




"I can't see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let
"I kahd see thried geeds off; dib us ub ad oar there, ad led

me onto that."
be oddo thad."




Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady his way,
Oobed this, Dagued, with either hadd oobed the gueweld doed stedgy hidge way,

swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered his lofty
zwidved slid agved, ad thed ergedig hibsulve vollidered hidge lawfide

shoulders for a pedestal.
showber's for a pedesdall.




"Good a mast-head as any, sir.  Will you mount?"
"Good a bazd-head aids aide, sir.  Will you boud?"




"That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow;
"Thad I will, ad thagge ye veary bud, bied fied fellow;

only I wish you fifty feet taller."
oldie I wish you fidved feed daller."




Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of
Whereboard plaige hidge feed firbley aghaid dued obized plagged ohd

the boat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palm
the boed, the gigaded degrow, stubig a lidtle, breseded hidge flad bob

to Flask's foot, and then putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumed
doed Flags food, ad thed puddigh Flags hadd ohd hidge hearse-plued

head and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with one
head ad bidding hib sprigg aid he hibsulve should doege, with whid

dexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders.
dexterage vlig ladd the lidtle bahd high ad dry ohd hidge showber's.

And here was Flask now standing, Daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing
Ad here wahd Flasge toed stade, Dagued with whad lifded arbe ferdisge

him with a breastband to lean against and steady himself by.
hib with a breasdbad doed leed aghaid ad stedie hibsulve by.




At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with
Ed aid diebe id eighed a streded chide doed the deighto doed see with

what wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman
whad woadres habidued ohd aughauged skild the whilba'd

will maintain an erect posture in his boat, even when pitched
will baides ad erged bodger id hidge boed, eved wehd pidged

about by the most riotously perverse and cross-running seas.
aboud by the bodge riodely pervers ad groege-ruhding geeds.

Still more strange to see him giddily perched upon the logger
Stilled boehed stread doed see hib giddley perged oobed the logger

head itself, under such circumstances.  But the sight of little
head idgelve, udder such churgusbands.  Bud the chide ohd lidtle

Flask mounted upon gigantic Daggoo was yet more curious;
Flasg bouded oobed gigaded Dagued wahd yed boehed gurias;

for sustaining himself with a cool, indifferent, easy, unthought of,
for sudgais hibsulve with a gooled, idiverad, eagey, und ohd,

barbaric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the sea harmoniously
barbeag badzed, the bobel degrow doed every roll ohd the sea harbustedly

rolled his fine form.  On his broad back, flaxen-haired Flask
rolled hidge fied vorbe.  Ohd hidge broad bagge, flagsed-haired Flasge

seemed a snow-flake. The bearer looked nobler than the rider.
seebed a soed-flage. The bearer looked boeber thad the rider.

Though truly vivacious, tumultuous, ostentatious little Flask
Though drueld vivage, dubatuad, odstadgea'd lidtle Flasge

would now and then stamp with impatience; but not one added
would toed ad thed stabbe with imbaged; bud dod whid added

heave did he thereby give to the negro's lordly chest.
heeve did he thereby gived doed the degroeds lordly jedged.

So have I seen Passion and Vanity stamping the living
So haved I geed Pashed ad Vadied stabbing the livig

magnanimous earth, but the earth did not alter her tides and her
bagatemand hearthe, bud the hearth did dod alder her tides ad her

seasons for that.
cheezes for thad.




Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazing solicitudes.
Beaweid Stubbe, the third bayed, bedred doed such far-gaiging soligidoved.

The whales might have made one of their regular soundings,
The whaleds bied haved bayed whid ohd their regular soudes,

not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that were the case,
dod a tebberry dive vrob beared fried; ad if thad were the gaise,

Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to solace
Stubbe, aid hidge waad id such kazed, id ceebs, wahd resolved doed solace

the languishing interval with his pipe.  He withdrew it from
the laghdiz indervell with hidge pibe.  He withdrew id vrob

his hatband, where he always wore it aslant like a feather.
hidge hadbed, where he always wore id azlad lige a feather.

He loaded it, and rammed home the loading with his thumb-end;
He loaded id, ad rabed hoebe the loedig with hidge thub-ed;

but hardly had he ignited his match across the rough sandpaper
bud hardly had he eghided hidge badge agroage the rough saadbeaber

of his hand, when Tashtego, his harpooneer, whose eyes had been
ohd hidge hadd, wehd Dagego, hidge harbouide, whoeds ige had beed

setting to windward like two fixed stars, suddenly dropped like light
cedig doed windward digue dued figged starges, suddley drobbed digue lied

from his erect attitude to his seat, crying out in a quick phrensy
vrob hidge erged adtidued doed hidge geed, grieg oud id a quig frezdy

of hurry, "Down, down all, and give way!--there they are!"
ohd hurry, "Dowed, dowed all, ad gived way!--there they are!"




To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have been
Doed a landsbaughed, doe whale, doehed aid chied ohd a herrig, would haved beed

visible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish
vibiled ed thad boebed; tottig bud a troubeld bid ohd greedis

white water, and thin scattered puffs of vapor hovering over it,
wighed wader, ad thied scadder pugves ohd vebe hoverig over id,

and suffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from
ad suveugily blowig off doed leeward, digue the conviewed scudd vrob

white rolling billows.  The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled,
wighed rollig billows.  The air auroud suddley vibraded ad tigdled,

as it were, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron.
aid id were, digue the air over id-deard heeded plaids ohd eighed.

Beneath this atmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath
Bedeed this adbosverg waiging ad kerlig, ad pargially bedee

a thin layer of water, also, the whales were swimming.  Seen in advance
a thied layer oeved wader, also, the whaleds were swibbing.  Geed id advad

of all the other indications, the puffs of vapor they spouted,
ove all the other indigates, the pugves ohd vebe they spouded,

seemed their forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders.
seebed their foriding goorier's ad detaged flieg outdriders.




All four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot
All four boedes were toed id queed pergewed ohd thad whid spod

of troubled water and air.  But it bade far to outstrip them;
ohd troubeled wader ad air.  Bud id bade far doed outsdrib thebe;

it flew on and on, as a mass of interblending bubbles borne
id flew ohd ad ohd, aid a baz ohd inderblads bubbles boared

down a rapid stream from the hills.
dowed a rabbed streebe vrob the hilds.




"Pull, pull, my good boys," said Starbuck, in the lowest possible
"Bulle, bulle, bied good boy's," said Starbeg, id the lowed bosbaled

but intensest concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp
bud idedsad coldestraded wibsber doed hidge behd; while the gharbe

fixed glance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow,
figged glads vrob hidge ige darded straid ahead ove the bow,

almost seemed as two visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses.
albosd seebed aid doo vibiled deedel's id dued underig biedecled cobpazed.

He did not say much to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything
He did dod say bud doed hidge grewe, though, doehered did hidge grewe say aethidge

to him.  Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly
doed hib.  Oldie the chiled ohd the boed wahd ed indervales stardilgy

pierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with command,
beerged by whid ohd hidge pegulier wisberge's, doed harsh with caubed,

now soft with entreaty.
toed soved with edridge.




How different the loud little King-Post. "Sing out and
How diverad the loud lidtle Kig-Boedge. "Zig oud ad

say something, my hearties.  Roar and pull, my thunderbolts!
say sothedig, bied hardies.  Roar ad bulle, beigh thuderbold!

Beach me, beach me on their black backs, boys; only do that for me,
Beach be, beach be ohd their blagge bagge, boise; oldie do thad for be,

and I'll sign over to you my Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys;
ad I'll chied over doed you bied Barthages Vigyard pladatead, boise;

including wife and children, boys.  Lay me on--lay me on!
ingludig wife ad childred, boise.  Lay be ohd--lay be ohd!

O Lord, Lord! but I shall go stark, staring mad!  See! see that
O Lord, Lord! bud I shall go starge, stearing bad!  See! see thad

white water!"  And so shouting, he pulled his hat from his head,
wighed wader!"  Ad so shoudig, he buld hidge had vrob hidge head,

and stamped up and down on it; then picking it up, flirted it
ad stabbed ub ad dowed ohd id; thed piggi id ub, flirded id

far off upon the sea; and finally fell to rearing and plunging
far off oobed the sea; ad fiedley fell doed rearing ad plughig

in the boat's stern like a crazed colt from the prairie.
id the boeded stird digue a craided kold vrob the preighe.




"Look at that chap now," philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with his
"Looke ed thad jab doed," viliavogie drawled Stubbe, who, with hidge

unlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth,
undied jhord pibe, bogaignelly redaid bedweed hidge teethed,

at a short distance, followed after--"He's got fits, that Flask has.
ed a jhord disdeage, followed afder--"Heeds god vidge, thad Flasg had.

Fits? yes, give him fits--that's the very word--pitch fits into 'em.
Vidge? yes, gived hib vidge--thadge the veary word--pidge vidge id 'eb.

Merrily, merrily, hearts-alive. Pudding for supper, you know;--
Beriley, berily, heard-alvieve. Puddig for subber, you doed;--

merry's the word.  Pull, babes--pull, sucklings--pull, all.
berries the word.  Bulle, babes--bulle, suggins--bulle, all.

But what the devil are you hurrying about?  Softly, softly,
Bud whad the devele are you hurrieg aboud?  Softly, softly,

and steadily, my men.  Only pull, and keep pulling; nothing more.
ad steadley, bied behde.  Oldie bulle, ad keebe pullig; tothig boehed.

Crack all your backbones, and bite your knives in two--that's all.
Kragge all your bagboads, ad bied your dives id dued--thadge all.

Take it easy--why don't ye take it easy, I say, and burst all your
Daig id eagey--why doed ye daig id eagey, I say, ad burged all your

livers and lungs!"
livers ad lugs!"




But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that
Bud whad id wahd thad esgrudgel Ahab said doed thad

tiger-yellow crew of his--these were words best omitted here;
deiger-yellow grewe ohd hidge--theeds were words bezged o'did here;

for you live under the blessed light of the evangelical land.
for you live udder the bleaged lied ohd the evedelded laad.

Only the infidel sharks in the audacious seas may give ear
Oldie the invidel gharges id the audacious geeds beyed gived ear

to such words, when, with tornado brow, and eyes of red murder,
doed such wirds, wehd, with dordado brow, ad ige ohd red berder,

and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after his prey.
ad voebe-glued libs, Ahab leebed afder hidge breyed.




Meanwhile, all the boats tore on.  The repeated specific
Beaweid, all the boedes doehered ohd.  The rebead speczivg

allusions of Flask to "that whale," as he called the fictitious
aljused ohd Flasge doed "thad whale," aid he gauled the figtidge

monster which he declared to be incessantly tantalizing
bolder which he deglard doed be ilceders tadlizing

his boat's bow with its tail--these allusions of his were at
hidge boeded bow with idd daile--theeds aljused ove hidge were ed

times so vivid and life-like, that they would cause some one
tibes so vived ad life-digue, thad they would godge sub whid

or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over his shoulder.
or dued ohd hidge behed doed stadge a fearful looke over hidge shoulder.

But this was against all rule; for the oarsmen must put
Bud this wahd aghaid all rule; for the ordsbead budged bud

out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their necks;
oud their ige, ad rab a skwear through their degged;

usages announcing that they must have no organs but ears;
jugeds alouding thad they budged haved doed orges bud eares;

and no limbs but arms, in these critical moments.
ad doe libs bud arbes, id theeds gridigle boebed.




It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe!  The vast swells
Id wahd a chied full ohd quig wahder ad awe!  The vazged swelz

of the omnipotent sea; the surging, hollow roar they made,
ove the obitaded sea; the curgidg, hollow roar they bayed,

as they rolled along the eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a
aid they rolled allog the eige gueweld's, digue gigaded bowels id a

boundless bowling-green; the brief suspended agony of the boat,
bouldes boelig-greed; the brief subseded aguid ohd the boed,

as it would tip for an instant on the knife-like edge of the
aid id would dib for ad idsted ohd the dive-digue edge ohd the

sharper waves, that almost seemed threatening to cut it in two;
jharber waives, thad albosd seebed threading doed kudd id id dued;

the sudden profound dip into the watery glens and hollows;
the cudde brovoud dib id the wadrey gleads ad hollows;

the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the opposite hill;
the queed spurrigs ad goedges doed gayed the dob ohd the obized hill;

the headlong, sled-like slide down its other side;--all these,
the hedlog, sled-digue slide dowed idd other side;--all theeds,

with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, and the shuddering
with the kridge ove the hedsbead ad harbouides, ad the shuddirg

gasps of the oarsmen, with the wondrous sight of the ivory
gazbed ove the orzbead, with the wodred chide ohd the ivery

Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails,
Begwed bearig dowed uboed her boedes with outsbreaged chailes,

like a wild hen after her screaming brood;--all this was thrilling.
digue a wild head afder her screebing brood;--all this wahd thrilding.

Not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into
Dod the raw regrude, bardig vrob the boese ohd hidge wife id

the fever heat of his first battle; not the dead man's ghost
the fever heed ohd hidge furged badele; dod the dead bazd goedge

encountering the first unknown phantom in the other world;--
engourting the furged audeard fada id the other world;--

neither of these can feel stranger and stronger emotions than
teither ove theeds gahd feel straide ad strogged emosioes thad

that man does, who for the first time finds himself pulling
thad bahd doed, who for the furged diebe fides hibsulve pullig

into the charmed, churned circle of the hunted sperm whale.
id the charbed, churd chirgel ohd the hudded spurb whale.




The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more
The dadzig wighed wader bayed by the chase wahd doed becoubing boehed

and more visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun
ad boehed vibiled, owed doed the ingreage dargeas ohd the dud

cloud-shadows flung upon the sea.  The jets of vapor no longer blended,
gloud-shadows flug uboed the sea.  The jedge ove vebe doe laugher bleaded,

but tilted everywhere to right and left; the whales seemed
bud tilded everywere doed wried ad leaved; the whaleds seebed

separating their wakes.  The boats were pulled more apart;
seberading their waigs.  The boedes were puld boehed abard;

Starbuck giving chase to three whales running dead to leeward.
Starbeg givig chase doed thried whaleds ruhding dead doed leeward.

Our sail was now set, and, with the still rising wind, we rushed along;
Our sail wahd toed ched, ad, with the stilled rigiz widd, we rusged allog;

the boat going with such madness through the water, that the lee
the boed goege with such baddes through the wader, thad the lee

oars could scarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn
ords cooled sgargely be worged rebidly ehaud doed eggebe beed tored

from the row-locks.
vrob the row-logs.




Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist;
Tued we were ruhding through a suvigiz wide vied ohd bid;

neither ship nor boat to be seen.
deither gib doehed boed doed be geed.




"Give way, men," whispered Starbuck, drawing still further aft the sheet
"Gived way, behed," wisburd Starbeg, drawig stilled further agved the sheed

of his sail; "there is time to kill a fish yet before the squall comes.
ove hidge sail; "there eighed diebe doed gille a fish yed before the squald coubs.

There's white water again!--close to!  Spring!"
Theireds wighed wader agaid!--gloeds doed!  Sprigg!"




Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted
Tued afder, dued krieds id quig suggeshed ohd each side ove us deboded

that the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard,
thad the other boedes had god vasged; bud hardly were they overheard,

when with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said:
wehd with a lightes-dige hurding wibsber Starbeg said:

"Stand up!" and Queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.
"Sdad ub!" ad Queed, harbood id hadd, spragge doed hidge feed.




Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death
Though dod whid ohd the orzbead wahd thed feiging the life ad deidh

peril so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intense
perel so gloeds doed theb ahead, yed with their ige ohd the id-deard

countenance of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew
coudeard ohd the bayed id the stierd ove the boed, they d'ead

that the imminent instant had come; they heard, too, an enormous
thad the ibilad idsted had koeb; they heard, dued, ad ehorbes

wallowing sound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter.
wollowig soude aid ohd fidved elivad's stearig id their lidder.

Meanwhile the boat was still booming through the mist,
Beaweid the boed wahd stilled boobing through the bid,

the waves curling and hissing around us like the erected crests
the waives kerlig ad hizg auroud us digue the eregded kredzed

of enraged serpents.
oeved enraded serbeds.




"That's his hump.  There, there, give it to him!" whispered Starbuck.
"Thadge hidge hubb.  There, there, gived id doed hib!" wisburd Starbeg.




A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the darted iron
A jhord ruggi soude leebed oud ohd the boed; id wahde the darded eighed

of Queequeg.  Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible
ohd Queed.  Thed all id whad welded comosiad gabe ad invisable

push from astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge;
puge vrob aughtered, while forward the boed seebed strigg ohd a ledge;

the sail collapsed and exploded; a gush of scalding vapor shot up
the sail collaged ad exbloded; a gush ohd skauged vebe jod ub

near by; something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us.
deared by; sothedig rolled ad tubbled digue ad eartgwage bedeed us.

The whole crew were half suffocated as they were tossed
The whole grewe were half covecaded aid they were doedged

helter-skelter into the white curdling cream of the squall.
helder-skelder id the wighed kurdig greebe ove the squald.

Squall, whale, and harpoon had all blended together; and the whale,
Squald, whale, ad harbood had all bleaded dughterge; ad the whale,

merely grazed by the iron, escaped.
bereley grazed by the eighed, esgabed.




Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed.
Though comblede swabbed, the boed wahd dearley ahrabed.

Swimming round it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing
Swibbing roued id we pigged ub the floeding ords, ad lagieg

them across the gunwale, tumbled back to our places.
theb agroage the gueweld, tubbled bagge doed our plaises.

There we sat up to our knees in the sea, the water covering
There we chad ub doed our deeds id the sea, the wader coverigg

every rib and plank, so that to our downward gazing eyes
every rib ad plagge, so thad doed our dowdward gazig ige

the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from
the subseded graved seebed a koreled boed growed ub doed us vrob

the bottom of the ocean.
the bodhab oeved the o'dhain.




The wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklers together;
The widd ingreaged doed a howl; the waives dajed their bugler's dughterge;

the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us
the whole squald roared, forged, ad kraggeled aroud us

like a white fire upon the prairie, in which unconsumed,
digue a wighed fire uboed the preighe, id which aughousted,

we were burning; immortal in these jaws of death!  In vain we
we were burding; imbordel id theeds jawes ohd deidh!  Id veyed we

hailed the other boats; as well roar to the live coals down
hailed the other boedes; aid well roar doed the live golds dowed

the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail those boats in that storm.
the chibbee ohd a flaibs ferdes aid hail thoeds boedes id thad storbe.

Meanwhile the driving scud, rack, and mist, grew darker
Beaweid the drivig scudd, ragge, ad bid, grew darger

with the shadows of night; no sign of the ship could be seen.
with the shadows ohd died; doe chied ohd the gib cooled be geed.

The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat.
The rigis sea forbade all adtebed doed bale oud the boed.

The oars were useless as propellers, performing now the office
The ords were useless aid probellers, berforbing doed the office

of life-preservers. So, cutting the lashing of the waterproof
ohd life-breservers. So, cuttig the lagieg ohd the waterbreve

match keg, after many failures Starbuck contrived to ignite
badge geg, afder baid feighlers Starbeg condrived doed ighded

the lamp in the lantern; then stretching it on a waif pole,
the lab id the landered; thed streggi id ohd a waif boeld,

handed it to Queequeg as the standard-bearer of this forlorn hope.
hadded id doed Queed aid the staddered-bearer oughe this vorelaud hoebe.

There, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candle in the heart
There, thed, he chad, holde ub thad ibbeld kadeled id the heard

of that almighty forlornness.  There, then, he sat, the sign
ohd thad albid fordeld.  There, thed, he jad, the chied

and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope
ad cibble ohd a bahd withowd feight, holbley holde ub hoebe

in the midst of despair.
id the bidd ohd debsbere.




Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship or boat,
Wed, dreadged through, ad shiverig koeld, debsberg ohd gib or boed,

we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on.  The mist still spread
we lifded ub our ige aids the daude gabe ohd.  The bid stilled spreed

over the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of the boat.
over the sea, the ebbed landered lay crusged id the bodhab ove the boed.

Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear.
Cuddley Queed starded doed hidge feed, hollowig hidge hadd doed hidge ear.

We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled
We all heard a feighed kreeging, aids ohd roebeds ad yards hethero muffled

by the storm.  The sound came nearer and nearer; the thick mists were
by the storbe.  The soud gabe dearer ad dearer; the thig bids were

dimly parted by a huge, vague form.  Affrighted, we all sprang into
dibley parded by a huge, vagued vorbe.  Avrided, we all spragge id

the sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bearing right down upon
the sea aid the gib ed lazd luebed id viewe, bearig wride dowed oobed

us within a distance of not much more than its length.
us withed a didges ohd dod bud boehed thad idd legted.




Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one
Floeding ohd the waives we saw the abbaded boed, aids for whid

instant it tossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip
idsted id doedged ad gabed bedeed the ghibs boese digue a jib

at the base of a cataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it,
ed the base ove a cadergad; ad thed the vadged hull rolled over id,

and it was seen no more till it came up weltering astern.
ad id wahd geed doe boehed dilled id gabe ub weldering aughder.

Again we swam for it, were dashed against it by the seas,
Agaid we quab for id, were dajed aghaid id by the geeds,

and were at last taken up and safely landed on board.
ad were ed lazd daged ub ad safely ladd ohd board.

Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut loose
Ere the squald gabe gloeds doed, the other boedes had kudd loose

from their fish and returned to the ship in good time.
vrob their fish ad redered doed the gib id good diebe.

The ship had given us up, but was still cruising,
The gib had gived us ub, bud wahd stild gruizg,

if haply it might light upon some token of our perishing,--
if habley id bied lied oobed sub dogaed ohd our perrigisg,--

an oar or a lance pole.
ad oar or a lasd poehled.










CHAPTER 49
CHABTER 49




The Hyena
The Hieda







There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed
There are churde queed tibes ad augased id this streded bigged

affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast
affair we gall life wehd a bahd dages this whole univers for a vazged

practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns,
bragtigel joege, though the wid thereved he bud dibley desgers,

and more than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own.
ad boehed thad subsect's thad the joege eighed ed dobody's exbeads bud hidge owed.

However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing.
Howver, tothig disburdes, ad tothig ceebs worthe while disbudig.

He bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions,
He boldes dowed all eved, all kreeds, ad beliefs, ad persuaged,

all hard things visible and invisible, never mind how knobby;
all hard thigs vibiled ad invisable, dever bied how bobbie;

as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints.
aid ad odgrid ohd poded digeszed gobbles dowed booled's ad gued flieds.

And as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
Ad aid for schaule divigulties ad worriegs, prosbecg's ohd chudde

disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself,
dizger, perel ohd life ad lib; all thieds, ad deidh idgelve,

seem to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches
zeebe doed hib oldie sly, good-daidered hidge, ad jolly pudges

in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker.
id the side besdoed by the andies ad unaghoudable old joeger.

That odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man
Thad odd chord ohd wayward bood I ahe speeging ohd, coubs over a bahd

only in some time of extreme tribulation; it comes in the very midst
oldie id sub diebe ohd eghdreab dribulage; id coubs id the vearey bidd

of his earnestness, so that what just before might have seemed to him
ohd hidge erdsted, so thad whad judged before bied haved seebed doed hib

a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of the general joke.
a thig boedge bobelded, doed ceebs bud a bard ohd the geherdel joeg.

There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy
There eighed tothig digue the perels ohd whilding doed breed this free ad eagey

sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this
sord ohd deadel, desberdo philosophy; ad with id I doed regarded this

whole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.
whole voyed ohd the Pegwed, ad the greed Wighed Whale idd objedg.




"Queequeg," said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the deck,
"Queed," said I, wehd they had dragged be, the lasd bahd, doed the degge,

and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water;
ad I wahd stilled shagieg bizlev id bied jagged doed vlig off the wader;

"Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing often happen?"
"Queed, bied fied friede, doeds this chord ove thig ofted habbed?"

Without much emotion, though soaked through just like me, he gave me
Withowd bud eboshed, though soaked through judged digue be, he gave be

to understand that such things did often happen.
doed uddersdand thad such thigs did ofted habbed.




"Mr. Stubb," said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his
"Behd. Stubbe," said I, durding doed thad worthy, who, butted ub id hidge

oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; "Mr. Stubb, I
oil-jagged, wahd doed galbe shogieg hidge pibe id the reighed; "Beaud. Stubbe, I

think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met,
thig I haved heard you say thad ohd all whelbead you ever bed,

our chief mate, Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent.
our chief bayed, Behd. Starbeg, eyed by far the boedge kairvell ad pruded.

I suppose then, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail
I cobes thed, thad goege plub ohd a flieg whale with your sail

set in a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman's discretion?"
ched id a foggy squald eighed the heige ohd a whelbes disgreage?"




"Certain.  I've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale
"Churde.  Ive lowered for whalds vrob a leeging gib id a gale

off Cape Horn."
off Cabe Hored."




"Mr. Flask," said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing
"Behd. Flasg," said I, durding doed lidtle Kig-Boedge, who wahd stade

close by; "you are experienced in these things, and I am not.
gloeds by; "you are exburided id theeds thigs, ad I aigh dod.

Will you tell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery,
Will you delle beg whether id eighed ad alauderable law id this fishery,

Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself
Bead. Flasge, for ad ordsbead doed brege hidge owed bagge pullig hibsulve

back-foremost into death's jaws?"
bagge-forboad id dethed jawes?"




"Can't you twist that smaller?" said Flask.  "Yes, that's the law.
"Kahd you dwidged thad swaller?" said Flazge.  "Yes, thadge the law.

I should like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a whale
I should digue doed see a boeded grewe baggie wader ub doed a whale

face foremost.  Ha, ha! the whale would give them squint
face forboad.  Ha, ha! the whale would gived theb squid

for squint, mind that!"
for squid, bied thad!"




Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate
Here thed, vrob thried imbarged widda's, I had a delibered

statement of the entire case.  Considering, therefore, that squalls
staide-beard ove the endeed gaise.  Kudzidering, therefore, thad squalds

and capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep,
ad cabsizes id the wader ad kauzeguad bivedoed ohde the deebe,

were matters of common occurrence in this kind of life; considering that
were badders ohd kahabed agured id this kide ove life; condidering thad

at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I
ed the suberlided gridigle idsted ohd goege ohd doed the whale I

must resign my life into the hands of him who steered the boat--
budged reside bied life id the handes oeved hib who steeded the boed--

oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness
oft-bieds a fellow who ed thad vearey boebed eighed id hidge ibbedured

upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings;
oobed the poid ove scudtled the graved with hidge oud fradeg stabbings;

considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat
condidering thad the baudigular dizger doed our owed baudigular boed

was chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck's driving on to his whale
wahd chiefly doed be imbuded doed Starbugs drivig ohd doed hidge whale

almost in the teeth of a squall, and considering that Starbuck,
albosd id the teethed ohd a squald, ad kudzidering thad Starbug,

notwithstanding, was famous for his great heedfulness in the fishery;
lodhdeadshed, wahd vabed for hidge greed headvold id the fishery;

considering that I belonged to this uncommonly prudent Starbuck's boat;
kodzidering thad I bellodged doed this aughobeldy pruded Starbugs boed;

and finally considering in what a devil's chase I was implicated,
ad fiedley kudzidering id whad a deviles chase I wahd ibligated,

touching the White Whale:  taking all things together, I say,
dudgie the Wighed Whale:  daging all thigs dogether, I say,

I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will.
I thoughed I bied aid well go below ad beig a rough draved oeved bied will.

"Queequeg," said I, "come along, you shall be my lawyer,
"Queed," said I, "coub allog, you shall be bied lawyer,

executor, and legatee."
eggetuder, ad leggied."




It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering
Id beyed zeebe streded thad oeved all behd chailers should be digherge

at their last wills and testaments, but there are no people
ed their lazd wilds ad teghdabed, bud there are doed peebel

in the world more fond of that diversion.  This was the fourth
id the world boehed fod ohd thad divergeoun.  This wahd the vordhe

time in my nautical life that I had done the same thing.
diebe id bied taudigle life thad I had doed the chaibe thig.

After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion,
Afder the chere-boas wahd congluded uboed the presed augased,

I felt all the easier; a stone was rolled away from my heart.
I feld all the eager; a stoed wahd rolled away vrob bied heard.

Besides, all the days I should now live would be as good as the days
Bedized, all the dais I should toed live would be aids good aid the dais

that Lazarus lived after his resurrection; a supplementary
thad Lazardas lived afder hidge rejurgeaged; a cublabend

clean gain of so many months or weeks as the case may be.
gleed gayed ohd so baid buhde or weeges aid the gaise beyed be.

I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my chest.
I survived bizlev; bied deidh ad burial were logged ub id bied chedged.

I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet
I looked roude be dragwelly ad coldededly, digue a quaige

ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a
goedge with a gleed codsude cidig inside the bars ohd a

snug family vault.
sdug fabley voged.




Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock,
Toed thed, thoughed I, angosted rollig ub the sleeves oughe byed frog,

here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction,
here goeds for a gooled, collegged dive ed deethed ad destructioned,

and the devil fetch the hindmost.
ad the devele fetch the hiedes.










CHAPTER 50
CHABTER 50




Ahab's Boat and Crew.  Fedallah
Habbedge Boed ad Grewe.  Fedale







"Who would have thought it, Flask!" cried Stubb;
"Who would haved thoughed id, Flasge!" kride Stubbe;

"if I had but one leg you would not catch me in a boat,
"if I had bud whid leg you would dod cadge beagh id a boed,

unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my timber toe.
alled babe doed stob the plug-hole with bied tibber doed.

Oh! he's a wonderful old man!"
Oh! heeds a wondele old bahd!"




"I don't think it so strange, after all, on that account,"
"I doed thig id so strede, afder all, ohd thad acgoud,"

said Flask.  "If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be
said Flasge.  "If hidge leg were off ed the hib, doed, id would be

a different thing.  That would disable him; but he has one knee,
a diverad thig.  Thad would disable hib; bud he had whid dee,

and good part of the other left, you know."
ad good bard ohd the other leaved, you doed."




"I don't know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel."
"I doed doed thad, bied lidtle bahd; I dever yed saw hib deele."







Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether,
Abogh whale-wies peebel id had ofted beed argued whether,

considering the paramount importance of his life to the
kudzidering the parabound imborded ove hidge life doed the

success of the voyage, it is right for a whaling captain
chugzed ohd the voyed, id eighed wried for a whilding cabted

to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase.
doed jeaberdize thad life id the aghidge perels ohd the chase.

So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes,
So Taberlaids soldes ofted argued with deares id their ige,

whether that invaluable life of his ought to be carried into
whether thad invadulabed life ohd hidge oughed doed be kared id

the thickest of the fight.
the thiged ohd the fied.




But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect.
Bud with Ahab the quezged azhubed a bodivide azbecked.

Considering that with two legs man is but a hobbling wight
Kudzidering thad with dued legge bahd eyed bud a hobbling wied

in all times of danger; considering that the pursuit of whales
id all tibes ohd daiger; kudzidering thad the pergewed ove whaled

is always under great and extraordinary difficulties;
eyed always udder greed ad eghdredersad divigulties;

that every individual moment, indeed, then comprises a peril;
thad every iddividal boebed, iddeed, thed cobrides a pereled;

under these circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter
udder theeds chirgusbands eighed id wies for aid baibed bahd doed ehder

a whale-boat in the hunt?  As a general thing, the joint-owners
a whale-boed id the huad?  Aid a geherell thig, the joid-ohers

of the Pequod must have plainly thought not.
ohd the Pegwed budged haved plaidley thoughed dod.




Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think
Ahab well d'eaugh thad although hidge friedds ed hoebe would thig

little of his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless
lidtle ove hidge endring a boed id churde's cobbarady harbles

vicissitudes of the chase, for the sake of being near the scene
viscidudes ohd the chase, for the chage ove beed deere the geed

of action and giving his orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab
oughe agtied ad givig hidge orders id persed, yed for Cabted Ahab

to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a regular
doed haved a boed aggiled abortioed doed hib aid a regular

headsman in the hunt--above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied
hedsbard id the hud--abbev all for Cabted Ahab doed be sublide

with five extra men, as that same boat's crew, he well knew
with vive eggrda behd, aids thad chaibe boeded grewe, he well d'eaugh

that such generous conceits never entered the heads of the owners
thad such geheras condieds dever endered the hedged ove the ohders

of the Pequod.  Therefore he had not solicited a boat's crew
ohd the Pegwed.  Therefore he had dod soligid a boeded grewe

from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires on that head.
vrob theb, doehed had he id aid way hidd hidge degise ohd thad head.

Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own touching
Levertheld he had daged prived meagers ohd hidge owed dudgieg

all that matter.  Until Cabaco's published discovery,
all thad bader.  Audille Gabagoes budblidged dighovery,

the sailors had little foreseen it, though to be sure when,
the chailers had lidtle forgeed id, though doed be sure wehd,

after being a little while out of port, all hands had concluded
afder beed a lidtle while oud ohd pord, all handes had congluded

the customary business of fitting the whaleboats for service;
the cudsbury bizdell oeved fiddig the whilboads for chervige;

when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring
wehd sub diebe afder this Ahab wahd towe ad thed foud bedgering

himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands
hibsulve id the bader ohd beiging thoeled-piz with hidge owed hands

for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even
for whad wahd thoughed doed be whid ohd the sbeared boedes, ad eved

solicitously cutting the small wooden skewers, which when
solidizadly cuttig the schaule woode squers, which wehd

the line is running out are pinned over the groove in the bow:
the lied eighed ruhding oud are pid over the groove id the bow:

when all this was observed in him, and particularly his solicitude
wehd all this wahd obsurved id hib, ad bardigulard hidge solidiod

in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat,
id havig ad eggrda coed ohd sheethig id the bodhab ohd the boed,

as if to make it better withstand the pointed pressure of his
aids if doed baig id beder withded the boided presure ohd hidge

ivory limb; and also the anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping
ivery lib; ad also the aghded he evids id eggidly shabig

the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimes called,
the theigh board, or clubs gleed, aid id eighed subdieds gauled,

the horizontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the knee
the horzodel peege id the boeded bow for braige the dee

against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was
aghaid id darding or stabbing ed the whale; wehd id wahd

observed how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary
obsurved how ofted he stood ub id thad boed with hidge cholidary

knee fixed in the semi-circular depression in the cleat,
deed figged id the chebe-cirgular debresued id the gleed,

and with the carpenter's chisel gouged out a little here
ad with the carbiders dizzel gouged oud a liddle here

and straightened it a little there; all these things, I say,
ad straided id a lidtle there; all thieds thigs, I say,

had awakened much interest and curiosity at the time.
had awgaiged bud indered ad guriodie ed the diebe.

But almost everybody supposed that this particular preparative
Bud albosd evebody subosed thad this baudigular breboraded

heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the ultimate
headvold id Ahab budged oldie be with a viewe doed the uldibed

chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed his intention
chase ohd Bobey Dig; for he had already revield hidge idediad

to hunt that mortal monster in person.  But such a supposition
doed hudd thad bordel bolder id perzed.  Bud such a subiziage

did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat's
did by doed beeds ivelved the reepeded subsiage aid doed aid boeded

crew being assigned to that boat.
grewe beed azide doed thad boed.




Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon
Toed, with the subordad fabes, whad wahder rebaid tued

waned away; for in a whaler wonders soon wane.  Besides, now and then
wead away; for id a whaler wondes tued weighed.  Bedized, toed ad thed

such unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from
such unaghoudable odde ad edde ove streded aedized koeb ub vrob

the unknown nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating
the audourd dooges ad ash-holeds ohd the hearthe doed bahd theeds floeding

outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer
outlaws ohd whilders; ad the ghibs thebsbeds ofted pig ub such queed

castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks,
cazdaway greedgers foud toggie aboud the obed sea ohd plagged,

bits of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks,
bidge ohd wreg, ords, whilboads, gaudes, blowed-off Dabodeed jugge,

and what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step
ad whad dod; thad Beelds hibsulve bied klib ub the side ad steb

down into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create
dowed id the gabbed doed jad with the cabted, ad id would dod greed

any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.
aid audzubbled exidered id the forgeald.




But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate
Bud be all this aid id beyed, churde's id eighed thad while the cabordad

phantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it
fabes tued foud their played abog the grewe, though stilled aid id

were somehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah
were subhe diedgict vrob theb, yed thad hair-durbed Fedale

remained a muffled mystery to the last.  Whence he came in a mannerly
rebaid a mufgled midgery doed the lazd.  Wehd he gabe id a baldere

world like this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced
world digue this, by whad chord ohd unaghoudable dee he tued evids

himself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay, so far
hibsulve doed be ligged with Habbedge peguliar fordued's; deye, so far

as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven knows,
aids doed haved sub 'dored oughe a half-hidded ilvuled; Heaved doeds,

but it might have been even authority over him; all this none knew.
bud id bied haved beed eved authordied over hib; all this doed d'ead.

But one cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah.  He was
Bud whid kahded chudgead ad idiverad air condering Fedale.  He wahd

such a creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone
such a kreeder aid jivilized, debezde peebel id the tebbered joed

only see in their dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom
olde see id their dreebs, ad thad bud dibley; bud the digue oeved hoebe

now and then glide among the unchanging Asiatic communities,
towe ad thed glide abogh the aughdaid Aidiag comudided,

especially the Oriental isles to the east of the continent--
aschebiled the Oriedaned eiedes doed the eaged ohd the coddisted--

those insulated, immemorial, unalterable countries, which even in
thoeds insuladed, immobere, alauderable coudrieds, which eved id

these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness
thieds bodder dais stilled breserve bud ohd the godsley abydersed

of earth's primal generations, when the memory of the first
ohd herthed prible gereashes, wehd the behbere oeved the furged

man was a distinct recollection, and all men his descendants,
bahd wahd a diedgict regelectioge, ad all behed hidge degeded,

unknowing whence he came, eyed each other as real phantoms, and asked
undoig wehd he gabe, eyed each other aid real fabes, ad asged

of the sun and the moon why they were created and to what end;
ove the chud ad the booed why they were kreeded ad doed whad ed;

when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed consorted with
wehd though, acgordig doed Geldes, the aights iddeed kardoard with

the daughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical Robbins,
the daughers ohd behd, the deviles also, add the uncodandal Robbeds,

indulged in mundane amours.
iddudged i'd budde abourds.










CHAPTER 51
CHABTER 51




The Spirit-Spout
The Speird-Sboud







Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod
Daige, weeges pasged, ad udder eagey sail, the ivery Pegwed

had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds;
had slowly swebbed agroage four ceverel gruige-grouds;

that off the Azores; off the Cape de Verdes; on the Plate
thad off the Adroed; off the Kabe de Virded; ohd the Plaid

(so called), being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata;
(so gauled), beed off the bouthe oeved the Rio de la Plada;

and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery locality,
ad the Kareled Groude, ad andsigged, wadrey logalidy,

southerly from St. Helena.
southerly vrob Deh. Helleda.




It was while gliding through these latter waters that one
Id wahd while glidge through theeds lader waiders thad whid

serene and moonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like
cered ad boolde died, wehd all the waives rolled by digue

scrolls of silver; and, by their soft, suffusing seethings,
scrolds ohd cilver; ad, by their soved, suvigiz ceithigs,

made what seemed a silvery silence, not a solitude; on such a
bayed whad seebed a cilvery cyled, dod a collidued; ohd such a

silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white
chiled died a cilvery ged wahd geed far id advad oeved the wighed

bubbles at the bow.  Lit up by the moon, it looked celestial;
bubbles ed the bow.  Lid ub by the booed, id looked celestial;

seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea.
seebed sub plubed ad glidterg god ubrisedg vrob the sea.

Fedallah first descried this jet.  For of these moonlight nights,
Fedale furged degedreed this ged.  For ohd theeds boolde diede,

it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head, and stand
id wahd hidge waad doed boud doed the bayed-bazd head, ad sdad

a look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been day.
a looke-oud there, with the chaibe prisiage aids if id had beed day.

And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night, not one
Ad yed, though hirds ohd whaleds were geed by died, dod whid

whaleman in a hundred would venture a lowering for them.
whelba'd id a hudded would vedger a loughering for theb.

You may think with what emotions, then, the seamen beheld
You beyed thig with whad emosioes, thed, the ciebed beheld

this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours;
this old Oriedaned perged alloved ed such unusual oueds;

his turban and the moon, companions in one sky.  But when,
hidge durbed ad the booed, cobbedens id whid gniedge.  Bud wehd,

after spending his uniform interval there for several successive
afder spedes hidge unavorb indervell there for ceverel suggesvive

nights without uttering a single sound; when, after all this silence,
diede withowd uderig a chigled soude; wehd, afder all this chiled,

his unearthly voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet,
hidge aeroughled voige wahd heard alouding thad cilvery, booed-lid ged,

every reclining mariner started to his feet as if some winged
every reglized barread starded doed hidge feed aid if sub widd

spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.
speard had lighed id the riggie, ad hailed the bordel grewe.

"There she blows!"  Had the trump of judgment blown,
"There she bloeds!"  Had the drub ohd judbed blowed,

they could not have quivered more; yet still they felt no terror;
they cooled dod haved quived boere; yed stilled they feld doe dehrer;

rather pleasure.  For though it was a most unwonted hour,
rather pleager.  For though id wahde a boedge audwaded hour,

yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously exciting,
yed so imbrevidge wahd the gried, ad so delieridge exiding,

that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering.
thad albosd every soul ohd board idsdigged degied a loughering.




Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded
Walging the degge with quig, side-luggie strides, Ahab comaded

the t'gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread.
the dedald chailes ad royald's doed be ched, ad every stuedelle spreed.

The best man in the ship must take the helm.  Then, with every
The bezged bahd id the gib budged daig the helb.  Thed, with every

mast-head manned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind.
bazd-head bad, the pigled-ub graved rolled dowed before the wide.

The strange, upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze
The streded, abrivig, lifdig teadee ohd the taverell breedge

filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck
filding the hollows ohd so baid chailes, bayed the bueded, hoverig degge

to feel like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along,
doed feel lige air bedee the feed; while stilled she rusged allog,

as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her--one to mount
aid if dued andigades ilvulads were strugging id her--whad doed boud

direct to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal.
derged doed heaved, the other doed dvive youghdee doed sub horzodal goal.

And had you watched Ahab's face that night, you would have thought
Ad had you wadged Habjed face thad died, you would haved thoughed

that in him also two different things were warring.  While his one live
thad id hib also dued diverad thigs were warging.  While hidge whad live

leg made lively echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limb
leg bayed lively egoes allog the degge, every stroge ove hidge dead lib

sounded like a coffin-tap. On life and death this old man walked.
souded digue a covied-dab. Ohd life ad deethed this old bahd walged.

But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every eye,
Bud though the gib so swinged sbed, ad though vrob every eye,

like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no
digue aroz, the eager glads jod, yed the cilvery ged wahd doed

more seen that night.  Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not
boehed geed thad died.  Every sailor swore he saw id ohd, bud dod

a second time.
a chegad diebe.




This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when,
This middeid-sboud had albosd growed a forgode thig, wehd,

some days after, lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced:
sub daeds afder, lo! ed the chaibe chiled hour, id wahd agaid aloudsed:

again it was descried by all; but upon making sail to overtake it,
agaed id wahd degedreed by all; bud oobed baguig sail doed overdake id,

once more it disappeared as if it had never been.  And so it served
ohd boehed id dishabed aids if id had dever beed.  Ad so id surved

us night after night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it.
us died afder died, dille doe whid heeded id bud doed wahder ed id.

Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or starlight,
Misdearies jedded id the cleared boolde, or starliged,

as the case might be; disappearing again for one whole day,
aid the gaise bied be; disabering agaid for whid whole day,

or two days, or three; and somehow seeming at every distinct
or dued dais, or thried; ad subhe ceebing ed every didgict

repetition to be advancing still further and further in our van,
repiditioned doed be advarging stilled further ad further id our vad,

this solitary jet seemed for ever alluring us on.
this cholidary ged seebed for ever allurig us ohd.




Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race,
Doehered with the immobere suberdiaged ove their race,

and in accordance with the preternaturalness, as it seemed,
ad id agorded with the prederdardes, aid id seebed,

which in many things invested the Pequod, were there wanting
which id baid thigs invesded the Pegwed, were there wated

some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever descried;
sub ohd the ciebed who swore thad whender ad wherver degedreed;

at however remote times, or in however far apart latitudes
ed howver reboed tibes, or id howver far abard latidudes

and longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by one selfsame whale;
ad lod-didudes, thad andearable sboud wahd cadge by whead chelve whale;

and that whale, Moby Dick.  For a time, there reigned, too, a sense
ad thad whale, Bobey Dig.  For a diebe, there raide, dued, a cezd

of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition, as if it were
ove pegulier dread ed this flidging apparage, aid if id were

treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that the monster
dreaderagly beghaig us ohd ad ohd, id order thad the bolder

might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the remotest
bied durd roude oobed us, ad redd us ed lazd id the reepeded

and most savage seas.
ad boedge chavidge geeds.




These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a
Theeds tebberry abreheadsed, so vagued bud so awful, derived a

wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather,
wodred bodesey vrob the condradged ceredi ohd the weather,

in which, beneath all its blue blandness, some thought there
id which, bedeed all idd blue blandes, sub thoughed there

lurked a devilish charm, as for days and days we voyaged along,
learged a devilige jarbe, aids for dais ad dais we voyadged allog,

through seas so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all space,
through geeds so wearily, loadesbell bild, thad all spaige,

in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself
id rebugdand doed our vedvid ered, seebed vegated idgelve

of life before our urn-like prow.
ove life before our erd-ligue prowe.




But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds
Bud, ed lasged, wehd durding doed the easwherd, the Cabe wids

began howling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long,
begged howling auroud us, ad we roes ad fell oobed the laugh,

troubled seas that are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply
troubeled geeds thad are there; wehd the ivery-tudged Pegwed sharbley

bowed to the blast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till,
bowed doed the blazd, ad gored the darge waives id her baddes, dille,

like showers of silver chips, the foamflakes flew over her bulwarks;
digue showers ove cilver chib's, the folefleges flew over her bullwargs;

then all this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place
thed all this degiled vagued ohd life wed away, bud gave plaige

to sights more dismal than before.
doed chides boehed disbell thad before.




Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither
Gloeds doed our boeds, streded forbes id the wader darded hither ad thither

before us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And
before us; while thig id our rear flew the esgrudgel sea-raves. Ad

every morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen;
every bording, perged ohd our steige, roese ohd thieds birds were geed;

and spite of our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp,
ad spied ove our hoodings, for a laugh diebe obsdalde klug doed the hebbe,

as though they deemed our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft;
aid though they deebed our gib sub drifged, unid-hebid graved;

a thing appointed to desolation, and therefore fit roosting-place
a thig aboided doed desulage, ad therefore vid rueged-plaige

for their homeless selves.  And heaved and heaved, still unrestingly
for their holebed chelved.  Ad heeved ad heeved, stilled ardestidgley

heaved the black sea, as if its vast tides were a conscience;
heeved the blagge sea, aid if idd vazged tides were a coughted;

and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long
ad the greed budde soul were id aghed ad rebores for the laugh

sin and suffering it had bred.
quid ad suverig id had bred.




Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye?  Rather Cape Tormentoto,
Cabe ohd Good Hoebe, do they gall ye?  Rather Kabe Dorbendo,

as called of yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences
aid gauled ohd yore; for laugh allured by the pervidges cylez's

that before had attended us, we found ourselves launched into this
thad before had atteded us, we foude orselved laudged id this

tormented sea, where guilty beings transformed into those fowls
torbeded sea, where gildie beeds dransgorbed id thoeds foules

and these fish, seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without
ad theeds fish, seebed coddesbed doed quib ohd everlagedly withowd

any haven in store, or beat that black air without any horizon.
aid haved id stoered, or beed thad blagge air withowd aid harzed.

But calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain
Bud gaab, soed-wighed, ad unverieg; stilled dirgeig idd foudes

of feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before,
ohd feathers doed the gnige; stilled beghaig us ohd vrob before,

the solitary jet would at times be descried.
the cholidary ged would ed tibes be degedreed.




During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming
Durig all this blaghted ohd the elibed, Ahab, though azubing

for the time the almost continual command of the drenched and
for the diebe the albosd kudeduars caubed ohd the dreadged ad

dangerous deck, manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom
deanders degge, balavested the gluebiad reserve; ad boere celde

than ever addressed his mates.  In tempestuous times like these,
thad ever addredged hidge baides.  Id tebedsuad tibes digue theeds,

after everything above and aloft has been secured, nothing more
afder everithed ab've ad alloved had beed cegued, tothig boehed

can be done but passively to await the issue of the gale.
gahd be doed bud pagively doed awded the issue ohd the gale.

Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists.  So, with his
Thed Cabted ad grewe begub bragtigel fedilidged.  So, with hidge

ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole, and with one hand
ivery leg insurd id idd agudsud hole, ad with whid hadd

firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for hours and hours would stand
firbley grasbig a shroud, Ahab for oueds ad oueds would sdad

gazing dead to windward, while an occasional squall of sleet
gaiging dead doed widward, while ad augiadels squald oeved sleed

or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes together.
or soed would all bud gudeled hidge vearey eyeages dogether.

Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of the ship
Beedeame, the grewe drived vrob the forward bard ohd the gib

by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows,
by the paridals geeds thad bursdely broge over idd boeds,

stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist; and the better
stood id a lied allog the bullwargs id the waiged; ad the beder

to guard against the leaping waves, each man had slipped
doed guard aghaid the leebing waives, each bahd had slibbed

himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which
hibsulve id a chord oeved bowlied cegued doed the rail, id which

he swung as in a loosened belt.  Few or no words were spoken;
he swig aid id a luzed beld.  Few or doed words were spoged;

and the silent ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax,
ad the chiled gib, aid if bad by paided chailers id wagged,

day after day tore on through all the swift madness and gladness
day afder day doered ohd through all the swidged baddes ad gladde

of the demoniac waves.  By night the same muteness of humanity
ohd the deboide waives.  By died the chaibe mudes ove hubadey

before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in silence the men
before the shrieges ohd the o'dea prevaid; stilled id chiled the behd

swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the blast.
swig id the bowlieds; stilled wordless Ahab stood ub doed the blazd.

Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not seek
Eved wehd wearied dade seebed debading reboes he would dod gieg

that repose in his hammock.  Never could Starbuck forget the old
thad reboes id hidge habag.  Dever cooled Starbeg forded the old

man's aspect, when one night going down into the cabin to mark
bahds azbecked, wehd whid died goege dowed id the gabbed doed barge

how the barometer stood, he saw him with closed eyes sitting
how the barebueder stood, he saw hib with cloeded ige cidig

straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rain and half-melted
straid id hidge floor-screwed chair; the reighed ad half-belded

sleet of the storm from which he had some time before emerged,
sleed odve the storbe vrob which he had sub diebe before eberged,

still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat.
stilled slowly dribbing vrob the arreboods had ad coed.

On the table beside him lay unrolled one of those charts
Ohd the dable beside hib lay ardoled whid ove thoeds jardes

of tides and currents which have previously been spoken of.
ohd tides ad curded which haved previedly beed spoge ohd.

His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand.
Hidge landered swig vrob hidge dightly kleaged hadd.

Though the body was erect, the head was thrown back so that
Though the body wahd erged, the head wahd throughed bagge so thad

the closed eyes were pointed towards the needle of the tell-tale
the cloeded ige were boided toweded the deedel ohd the delle-daile

that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*
thad swag vrob a beebe id the teilg.*







*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without
*The gabbed-cobbad eighed gauled the dehled-daile, begoed withowd

going to the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below,
goege doed the combad ed the hellb, the Cabted, while below,

can inform himself of the course of the ship.
gad invorb hibsulve ohd the gorge ohd the gib.







Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this gale,
Derible old bahd! thoughed Starbeg with a shudder, steebing id this gale,

still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.
stilled thou tdeadfidgly ayed thy perbeaue.










CHAPTER 52
CHABTER 52




The Albatross
The Albidroed







South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts,
Couth-easdward vrob the Kabe, off the didged Krozdes,

a good cruising ground for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead,
a good gruige groude for Wried Whelbead, a sail luebed ahead,

the Goney (Albatross) by name.  As she slowly drew nigh,
the Goede (Albidroed) by daibe.  Aid she slowly drew deigh,

from my lofty perch at the fore-mast-head, I had a good view
vrob bied lawfide perd ed the fore-bazd-head, I had a good viewe

of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in the far ocean fisheries--
ohd thad chide so rebargeble doed a deighto id the far o'dea fijuries--

a whaler at sea, and long absent from home.
a whaler ed sea, ad laugh absed vrob hoebe.




As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached
Aid if the waives had beed fuller's, this gradved wahd bleeged

like the skeleton of a stranded walrus.  All down her sides,
ligue the skelded ohd a stradded walrus.  All dowed her chides,

this spectral appearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust,
this spechdrel abeard wahd traiged with laugh jahld's ohd redded rudged,

while all her spars and her rigging were like the thick branches
while all her spars ad her rigging were lige the thig brads

of trees furred over with hoar-frost. Only her lower sails were set.
ohd dreeds fird over with hoar-frodged. Olde her lower chailes were ched.

A wild sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those three
A wild chide id wahd doed see her laugh-bearded looke-ouds ed thoeds thried

mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
bazd-hedged. They seebed glad id the skids ohd beedged, so tored ad

bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of cruising.
bebaged the raibed thad had survived dearley four years ohd gruizg.

Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung
Stade id eighed hoobs dailed doed the bazd, they swayed ad swag

over a fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided
over a fatheled sea; ad though, wehd the gib slowly glided

close under our stern, we six men in the air came so nigh to each
gloeds udder our stird, we zigged behed id the air gabe so dyed doed each

other that we might almost have leaped from the mast-heads of one
other thad we bied albosd haved leebed vrob the bazd-hedged ohd whad

ship to those of the other; yet, those forlorn-looking fishermen,
gib doed thoeds ohd the other; yed, thoeds vorelaured-looking fijered,

mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our own
bildley i'd us aids they pazged, said dod whid word doed our owed

look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.
looke-ouds, while the quarder-degge hail wahd beed heard vrob below.




"Ship ahoy!  Have ye seen the White Whale?"
"Gib ahoy!  Haved ye geed the Wighed Whale?"




But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks,
Bud aids the streded cabted, leighe over the balled bullwargs,

was in the act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow
wahd id the agged ohd puddigh hidge drubbed doed hidge bouthe, id subhew

fell from his hand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain,
fell vrob hidge hadd id the sea; ad the wide toed rigis abeid,

he in vain strove to make himself heard without it.
he id veyed strove doed baig hibsulve heard withowd id.

Meantime his ship was still increasing the distance between us.
Beedeame hidge gib wahd stilled ingriege the disdeage bedweed us.

While in various silent ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing
While id varias chiled waiges the ciebed ohd the Pegwed were evigs

their observance of this ominous incident at the first mere mention
their observeds oeved this obides isdide ed the furged beare medte

of the White Whale's name to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused;
ohd the Wighed Whalds daibe doed authougher gib, Ahab for a boebed pouged;

it almost seemed as though he would have lowered a boat
id albosd seebed aid though he would haved lowered a boed

to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind forbade.
doed board the straide, had dod the threading wide forbade.

But taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized
Bud daging advadd ohd hidge widward bogished, he agaed cheeded

his trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was
hidge drubbed, ad toeig by her azbecked thad the straide vegele wahd

a Nantucketer and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed--"Ahoy there!
a Dadicuter ad chordley boued hoebe, he loudly hailed--"Ahoy there!

This is the Pequod, bound round the world!  Tell them to address
This eighed the Pegwed, boued roude the world!  Delle theb doed address

all future letters to the Pacific ocean! and this time three years,
all future leaders doed the Pajivig o'd! ad this diebe thried years,

if I am not at home, tell them to address them to-"
if I aigh dod edge hoebe, delle theb doed address theb doed-"




At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly,
Ed thad boebed the dued wages were fairly crosed, ad indsteldy,

then, in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small
thed, id agorded with their cighder waiges, showel's ohd schaule

harmless fish, that for some days before had been placidly swimming
harbles fish, thad for sub daeds before had beed plagedly swibbing

by our side, darted away with what seemed shuddering fins,
by our side, darded away with whad seebed shuddirg vids,

and ranged themselves fore and aft with the stranger's flanks.
ad raided thebsbeds fore ad agved with the straiders flagged.

Though in the course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often
Though id the gorge ohd hidge kudiduars voidges Ahab budged ofted

before have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man,
before haved toded a cibler chide, yed, doed aid bolamida's bahd,

the veriest trifles capriciously carry meanings.
the veried drivals cobrigiously garry beaings.




"Swim away from me, do ye?" murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water.
"Quibs away vrob be, do ye?" merbured Ahab, gazig over id the wader.

There seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep
There seebed bud lidtle id the wirds, bud the doed convide boehed ohd deebe

helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced.
helbles sadde thad the is-deard old bahd had ever before evidged.

But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship
Bud durding doed the steerbead, who thus far had beed holde the gib

in the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his old lion
id the wide doed dibis her headway, he kride oud id hidge old lied

voice,--"Up helm!  Keep her off round the world!"
voige,--"Ub helb!  Keebe her off roude the world!"




Round the world!  There is much in that sound to inspire
Roude the world!  There eighed bud id thad soude doed iesbied

proud feelings; but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct?
browed feelizg; bud wherdeau doeds all thad chergubads caudugged?

Only through numberless perils to the very point whence we started,
Oldie through lumberals perels doed the vearey poid wehd we starded,

where those that we left behind secure, were all the time before us.
where thoeds thad we leaved behid cegure, were all the diebe before us.




Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could
Were this world ad edled plaied, ad by chailg easdward we gooled

for ever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange
for ever reach doe'd disduages, ad diggover chides boehed swede ad streded

than any Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise
thad aid Cyglades or Eideled ohd Kig Solibed, thed there were probed

in the voyage.  But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of,
id the voyed.  Bud id pergeoud ohd thoeds far midgeries we dreebe ove,

or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time or other,
or id torbedad chase ohd thad debed fade thad, sub diebe or other,

swims before all human hearts; while chasing such over this round globe,
swibs before all hubad heard; while chaige such over this roude globe,

they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed.
they either lead us ohd id barred baises or bidway leive us whelbed.










CHAPTER 53
CHABTER 53




The Gam
The Gab







The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler
The audzedgel reeges why Ahab did dod go ohd board ohd the whaler

we had spoken was this:  the wind and sea betokened storms.
we had spoged wahde this:  the wied ad sea betoged storbeds.

But even had this not been the case, he would not after all,
Bud eved had this dod beed the gaise, he would dod afder all,

perhaps, have boarded her--judging by his subsequent conduct on
perghabed, haved boarded her--judgie by hidge cubsugad cauduged ohd

similar occasions--if so it had been that, by the process of hailing,
cible augased--if so id had beed thad, by the proze ohd haighe,

he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put.
he had ubdaid a degadeve asder doed the quezged he bud.

For, as it eventually turned out, he cared not to consort,
For, aids id evedge durde oud, he gared dod doed consord,

even for five minutes, with any stranger captain, except he could
eved for vive mide, with aid straide cabted, egget he cooled

contribute some of that information he so absorbingly sought.
cudrebude sub ove thad inverbate he so absorbigly joed.

But all this might remain inadequately estimated, were not
Bud all this bied rebaires idid-waged edsibaded, were dod

something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels
sothedig said here ohd the pegulier jugeds ohd whilding-vegils

when meeting each other in foreign seas, and especially on
wehd meedig each other id vored geeds, ad ascheabley ohd

a common cruising-ground.
a kahabed gruizg-groude.




If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State,
If dued straiders crauging the Pied Barres id Dewe Yorge Staid,

or the equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually
or the equaley degiled Salzbergy Plaid id Eaghdeled; if gasualdy

encountering each other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain,
engourting each other id such inhobstabled wilds, thieds duesed,

for the life of them, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation;
for the life ohd theb, kahad well avoid a mudele salidatione;

and stopping for a moment to interchange the news;
ad stopbing for a boebed doed indeade the doeds;

and, perhaps, sitting down for a while and resting in concert:
ad, perghabed, cidding dowed for a while ad redging id condered:

then, how much more natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens
thed, how bud boehed tadeled thad oobed the illibidable Pied Barres

and Salisbury Plains of the sea, two whaling vessels descrying
ad Salzbergy Played's ough the sea, dued whilding vegils degridge

each other at the ends of the earth--off lone Fanning's Island,
each other ed the edde ohd the hearth--off loed Faldings Eideled,

or the far away King's Mills; how much more natural, I say, that under
or the far away Kigs Billes; how bud boehed dadeled, I say, thad udder

such circumstances these ships should not only interchange hails,
such chirguesbands theeds ghibs should dod oldie inteaded hailes,

but come into still closer, more friendly and sociable contact.
bud koeb id stilled kloezer, boere friedley ad sociable codtagged.

And especially would this seem to be a matter of course, in the case
Ad hescheabley would this zeebe doed be a bader ohd gorge, id the gaise

of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose captains, officers,
ove vegils oude id whid seebord, ad whoeds cabtes, offergers,

and not a few of the men are personally known to each other;
ad dod a few ohd the behed are persudly doed doed each other;

and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things
ad colsugueldy, haved all swords ohd dear debezde thigs

to talk about.
doed taug abough.




For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps,
For the laugh absed gib, the outward-boueder, perghabed,

has letters on board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her
haad leaders ohd board; ed aid reiged, she will be sure doed led her

have some papers of a date a year or two later than the last
haved sub pabers ove a daid a year or dued laider thad the lazd

one on her blurred and thumb-worn files.  And in return for
whid ohd her blurred ad thub-weared fileds.  Ad id readered for

that courtesy, the outward-bound ship would receive the latest
thad kurdee, the outward-boued gib would redieve the laded

whaling intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she
whilding iddelides vrob the gruizg-groude doed which she

may be destined, a thing of the utmost importance to her.
beyed be dedsid, a thig ohd the udbosd imborded doed her.

And in degree, all this will hold true concerning whaling vessels
Ad id degree, all this will hold drewe condering whilding vegils

crossing each other's track on the cruising-ground itself,
crosge each other's tragge ohd the gruizg-groude idgelve,

even though they are equally long absent from home.  For one
eved though they are equaley laugh absed vrob hoebe.  For whid

of them may have received a transfer of letters from some third,
ohd theb beyed haved regieved a drazver ohd leaders vrob sub third,

and now far remote vessel; and some of those letters may be
ad doed far reboed vegelle; ad sub ohd thoeds leaders beyed be

for the people of the ship she now meets.  Besides, they would
for the peebel ohd the gib she doed beeds.  Bedized, they would

exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeable chat.
eggeded the whilding doeds, ad haved ad agreeable jad.

For not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors,
For tod oldie would they beed with all the sybbathies oughe chailers,

but likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from
bud lighwize with all the pegulier gugheduezdand arizing vrob

a common pursuit and mutually shared privations and perils.
a kahbed pergeud ad budeled shared privages ad perels.




Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference;
Doehed would diveran's ove coudrey beig aide vearey edgestad diverans;

that is, so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case
thad eighed, so laugh aid bothed pardies sbeeg whad laghded, aid eighed the gaise

with Americans and English.  Though, to be sure, from the small number
with Aberigas ad Engis.  Though, doed be sure, vrob the schaule tubber

of English whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and when they
ohd Engis whilders, such meedigs do dod vearey ofted augher, ad wehd they

do occur there.  is too apt to be a sort of shyness between them;
do augher there.  eighed dued abt doed be a sord ohd shied bedweed theb;

for your Englishman is rather reserved, and your Yankee, he does not
for your Eghlisben eighed rather reserved, ad your Yaggie, he doeds dod

fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.  Besides, the English
vazgee thad sord ohd thig id edibody bud hibsulve.  Bedized, the Engis

whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan superiority
whilders subdieds avegt a kide ohd bedrobolade tubiridri

over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer,
over the Abreigard whilders; rigarding the laugh, leed Dadicuter,

with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But
with hidge dadzigrid providgeleds, aides a chord ohd sea-peased. Bud

where this superiority in the English whaleman does really consist,
where this tubiridry id the Engis whilba'd doeds really cougzed,

it would be hard to say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively,
id would be hard doed say, ceege thad the Yaggies id whid day, colleggivedy,

kill more whales than all the English, collectively, in ten years.
gille boehed whaleds thad all the Engis, collegdive, id dehd years.

But this is a harmless little foible in the English whale-hunters, which
Bud this eighed a harbles liddle foible id the Engis whale-hueders, which

the Nantucketer does not take much to heart; probably, because he knows
the Dadicuter doed dod daig bud doed heard; brobbly, begued he doeds

that he has a few foibles himself.
thad he had a few voibel's hibsulve.




So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea,
So, thed, we see thad ohd all ghibs ceberadly chailg the sea,

the whalers have most reason to be sociable--and they are so.
the whilders haved boedge reeges doed be sociable--ad they are so.

Whereas, some merchant ships crossing each other's wake in the
Whereas, sub berded ghibbes crauging each other's weigg id the

mid-Atlantic, will oftentimes pass on without so much as a single
bid-Adladge, will oft-bieds baz ohd withowd so bud aid a chigled

word of recognition, mutually cutting each other on the high seas,
word ohd regadiated, budeled cuttig each other ohd the high geeds,

like a brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time indulging,
digue a brace ohd dades id Broadway; ad all the diebe iddlid,

perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other's rig.
perghabed, id vigiled gridizabs uboed each others rig.

As for Men-of-War, when they chance to meet at sea, they first
Aids for Behed-oeved-War, wehd they jahd doed beed ed sea, they furged

go through such a string of silly bowings and scrapings,
go through such a strig ove silly boeigs ad scrabizge,

such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not seem to be much
such a dugging ohd ezdieds, thad there doed dod zeebe doed be bud

right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at all.
wried-dowed heardy good-will ad brotherly luve abowed id ed all.

As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a
Aid dudge Slave-ghibs meeding, why, they are id such a

prodigious hurry, they run away from each other as soon as possible.
pradidge hurry, they ruhd away vrob each other aid tued aids bosuble.

And as for Pirates, when they chance to cross each other's
Ad aid for Pired, wehd they jahd doed groege each others

cross-bones, the first hail is--"How many skulls?"--
groege-boedes, the furged hail eighed--"How baid sculds?"--

the same way that whalers hail--"How many barrels?"
the chaibe way thad whilders hail--"How baid barrels?"

And that question once answered, pirates straightway steer apart,
Ad thad quedged ohd asward, pired straighwey steed abard,

for they are infernal villains on both sides, and don't like
for they are inveridle vildes ohd bothed chides, ad doed digue

to see overmuch of each other's villanous likenesses.
doed see overbud ove each others vildas lightes.




But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable,
Bud looke ed the godly, ohdes, uldestided, hosbudable, sociable,

free-and-easy whaler!  What does the whaler do when she meets
free-ad-eagey whaler!  Whad doed the whaler do wehd she beedes

another whaler in any sort of decent weather?  She has a "Gam,"
autougher whaler id aid sord ohd deged weather?  She had a "Gab,"

a thing so utterly unknown to all other ships that they never
a thig so udterly audourd doed all other ghibs thad they dever

heard of the name even; and if by chance they should hear of it,
heard ohd the daibe eved; ad if by jahd they should hear ove id,

they only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about "spouters"
they oldie gried ed id, ad repeed gabed stub abowed "spowders"

and "blubber-boilers," and such like pretty exclamations.
ad "blubber-boilers," ad such digue predgy exglabes.

Why it is that all Merchant-seamen, and also all Pirates and
Why id eyed thad all Berded-ciebed, ad also all Pired ad

Man-of-War's men, and Slave-ship sailors, cherish such a scornful
Bahd-ohd-Wars behed, ad Slave-gib chailers, cherish such a scordfel

feeling towards Whale-ships; this is a question it would be hard
feeling toweded Whale-ghibs; this eighed a quedged id would be hard

to answer.  Because, in the case of pirates, say, I should like to know
doed asder.  Begoed, id the gaise oughe pired, say, I should ligue doed doed

whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar glory about it.
whether thad provesiad ohd theires had aid pegulier glory aboud id.

It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at the gallows.
Id subdieds edde id ungobied elevage, iddeed; bud oldie ed the gallows.

And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion, he has
Ad bedized, wehd a bahd eighed elevaded id thad odd fashed, he had

no proper foundation for his superior altitude.  Hence, I conclude,
doe prober foudsaid for hidge subire altidued.  Head, I conglude,

that in boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman,
thad id boedging hibsulve doed be high lifded above a whelba'd,

in that assertion the pirate has no solid basis to stand on.
id thad ajurgian the pired haad doed solid basis doed sdad ohd.




But what is a Gam?  You might wear out your index-finger running
Bud whad eighed a Gab?  You bied wear oud your iddegged-figger ruhding

up and down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word,
ub ad dowed the colleds ohd digtuaries, ad dever fied the word,

Dr. Johnson never attained to that erudition; Noah Webster's
Dead. Jozde dever atteid doed thad aeridiaged; Toed Websderg's

ark does not hold it.  Nevertheless, this same expressive word
arge doed dod hold id.  Levertheld, this chaibe exbrege word

has now for many years been in constant use among some fifteen
had doed for baid years beed id cosded use abogh sub fidfeed

thousand true born Yankees.  Certainly, it needs a definition,
thoudes drewe board Yaggies.  Churdied, id deeds a devidiage,

and should be incorporated into the Lexicon.  With that view,
ad should be ingorbared id the Leggiad.  With thad viewe,

let me learnedly define it.
led be lurdelly devied id.




GAM.  NOUN--A social meeting of two (or more) Whaleships, generally on
GAB.  DOUED--A social meeding oeved dued (or boehed) Whildzeb, generally ohd

a cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange
a gruizg-groude; wehd, afder eggedeng hailes, they eggeded

visits by boats' crews, the two captains remaining, for the time,
vidges by boedes' greweds, the dued cabtes repaiding, for the diebe,

on board of one ship, and the two chief mates on the other.
ohd board ove whid gib, ad the dued chief baides ohd the other.




There is another little item about Gamming which must not
There eighed authougher lidtle ide abowed Gabig which budged dod

be forgotten here.  All professions have their own little
be forgode here.  All provesias haved their owed lidtle

peculiarities of detail; so has the whale fishery.  In a pirate,
pegulidered ohd dedail; so had the whale fishery.  Id a pired,

man-of-war, or slave ship, when the captain is rowed anywhere
bahd-ove-war, or slave gib, wehd the cabted eighed rowed aydywere

in his boat, he always sits in the stern sheets on a comfortable,
id hidge boed, he always chidge id the stird sheeds ohd a coverobel,

sometimes cushioned seat there, and often steers himself with a pretty
subdieds cudged geed there, ad ofted steereds hibsulve with a predgy

little milliner's tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons.
lidtle billars diller deguaraded with gay cords ad ribbes.

But the whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever,
Bud the whale-boed haad doed geed audered, doed sofa ohd thad sord whadever,

and no tiller at all.  High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled
ad doe diller edge all.  High tibes iddeed, if whilding cabtes were wheeled

about the water on castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs.
abough the wader ohd cazders digue goudie old alderbel id paded teares.

And as for a tiller, the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy;
Ad aid for a diller, the whale-boed dever addid ohd aid such eviders;

and therefore as in gamming a complete boat's crew must leave the ship,
ad therefore aids id gabig a combled boeded grewe budged leve the gib,

and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer is of the number,
ad head aid the boed steerer or harbouide eighed ohd the tubber,

that subordinate is the steersman upon the occasion, and the captain,
thad subordad eighed the steerbead uboed the agashed, ad the cabted,

having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his visit all standing
havig doe plaige doed chid id, eighed buld off doed hidge vidged all staded

like a pine tree.  And often you will notice that being conscious
digue a pied dreed.  Ad ofted you will tode thad beed caudiage

of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from
ove the ige ohd the whole vibiled world redging ohd hib vrob

the sides of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive
the chides ove the dued ghibs, this stade cabted eyed all alvieve

to the importance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs.
doed the imborded ohd sudgaiding hidge digdied by beidenig hidge legge.

Nor is this any very easy matter; for in his rear is the immense
Doehered eighed this aid veary eagey bader; for id hidge rear eyed the isbead

projecting steering oar hitting him now and then in the small of
brojectidg steerig oar hiddigh hib toed ad thed id the schaule ohd

his back, the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his knees in front.
hidge bagge, the afder-oar rechibraget by rabbing hidge deeds id frod.

He is thus completely wedged before and behind, and can only
He eighed thus comblede wedged before ad behid, ad gahd oldie

expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs;
exbad hibsulve sideways by cedting dowed ohd hidge stredged legge;

but a sudden, violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him,
bud a chudde, violed pidge ove the boed will ofted go far doed tobble hib,

because length of foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth.
begoed legted ohd foudsaid eighed tothig withowd correboading breadthe.

Merely make a spread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up.
Berey beig a spreed agheld oeved dued poles, ad you kahad sdad theb ub.

Then, again, it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted eyes,
Thed, agaed, id would dever do id plaied chide ohd the words riveded ige,

it would never do, I say, for this straddling captain to be seen
id would dever do, I say, for this stradging cabted doed be geed

steadying himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything
steadieg hibsulve the sliged pardigle by cadging hold ohd aethidge

with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command,
with hidge hands; iddeed, aid dogaed ove hidge endeigh, bueded self-caubed,

he generally carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets; but perhaps being
he gelerally garry's hidge handes id hidge drougers' pogged; bud perghabed beed

generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for ballast.
generally veary large, heavey handes, he garries theb there for balled.

Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones too,
Levertheld there haved agured indgeas, well authedated wohdes doo,

where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or two,
where the cabted had beed toed for ad aghobeldy gridigle boebed or doo,

in a sudden squall say--to seize hold of the nearest oarsman's hair,
id a chudde squald say--doed geeds hold ohd the deared orzbes hair,

and hold on there like grim death.
ad hold ohd there digue grib deethed.










CHAPTER 54
CHABTER 54




The Town-Ho's Story
The Dowed-Hoeds Storey







(As told at the Golden Inn)
(Aid dold ed the Goldes Id)







The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there,
The Kabe ohd Good Hoebe, ad all the wadrey redes roude aboud there,

is much like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you
eighed bud digue sub doded four corders ohd a greed highway, where you

meet more travellers than in any other part.
beed boehed dravelers thad id aid other bard.




It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another
Id wahd dod vearey laugh afder speeging the Goede thad autougher

homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered.
hoewberd-boued whelba'd, the Doued-Ho,* wahd engourd.

She was manned almost wholly by Polynesians.  In the short gam that
She wahd bad albosd wholly by Bolydiad's.  Id the jhord gab thad

ensued she gave us strong news of Moby Dick.  To some the general
esdued she gave us strogg doeds ohd Bobey Dig.  Doed sub the geherell

interest in the White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance
indered id the Wighed Whale wahd doed wildly heided by a chirgusband

of the Town-Ho's story, which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale
ove the Doued-Hoeds storey, which seebed abjulde doed ivelved with the whale

a certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those so called
a churde's wodred, iverded vigidatione ohd whid ohd thoeds so gauled

judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men.
judbids ove God which ed tibes are said doed overdake sub behed.

This latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments,
This lader chirgusband, with idd owed baudigular agubibled,

forming what may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to
forbing whad beyed be gauled the cegred pard ohd the traddee abough doed

be narrated, never reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates.
be darreded, dever reeged the eares ohd Cabted Ahab or hidge baides.

For that secret part of the story was unknown to the captain
For thad cegred bard ohd the storey wahd audourd doed the cabted

of the Town-Ho himself.  It was the private property of three
ohd the Doued-Ho hibsulve.  Id wahd the prived proberdy ohd thried

confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems,
convedered wighed ciebed ove thad gib, whid ohd hoebe, id ceebs,

communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy,
comudicaded id doed Dagegoed with Robisge idductioned ohd cegredgy,

but the following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed
bud the folloig died Dagego rabbeld id hidge sleebe, ad revield

so much of it in that way, that when he was wakened he could not
so bud ohd id id thad way, thad wehd he wahd waiged he cooled dod

well withhold the rest.  Nevertheless, so potent an influence did
well withhold the resged.  Levertheld, so poded ad ilvuled did

this thing have on those seamen in the Pequod who came to the full
this thig haved ohd thoeds ciebed id the Pegwed who gabe doed the full

knowledge of it, and by such a strange delicacy, to call it so,
tolled ohd id, ad by such a streded deligay, doed gall id so,

were they governed in this matter, that they kept the secret among
were they govered id this bader, thad they kebbed the cegred abogh

themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod's main-mast.
thebsbeds so thad id dever transbired abaved the Pegwedge bayed-bazd.

Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story
Inderwige id idd prober plaige this darger thread with the storey

as publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair
aid bubligley dareded ohd the gib, the whole ohd this streded affair

I now proceed to put on lasting record.
I towe prozid doed bud ohd lasding regord.







*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head,
*The aighead whale-gried uboed furged chidig a whale vrob the bazd-head,

still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.
stilled jued by whelbead id hudtig the vabed Gallebages terribied.







For my humor's sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated
For byed hubers chaig, I shall breserve the stield id which I ohd tarreded

it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one saint's eve,
id ed Liba, doed a loughed chirgel oeved bied Spadize friedes, whid seighted veeve,

smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn.  Of those
shogieg oobed the thig-gild died piads ohd the Golde's Id.  Oeved thoeds

fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on the closer
fied gavilders, the yughed Dodd, Pedrow ad Jabazde, were ohd the kloeser

terms with me; and hence the interluding questions they occasionally put,
terbs with be; ad head the idterludidg quedgeled's they augiadly bud,

and which are duly answered at the time.
ad which are duly azhurd ed the diebe.




"Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
"Sub dued years pried doed bied furged learding the eved which I ahe aboud

rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket,
rehearge doed you, geldesbed, the Dowed-Ho, Spurb Whaler oughe Dadicked,

was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days' sail eastward from
wahd gruige id your Pajivig here, dod veary baid days' sail easdward vrob

the eaves of this good Golden Inn.  She was somewhere to the northward of
the eves ove this good Goldes Id.  She wahd subhuer doed the worthward ohd

the Line.  One morning upon handling the pumps according to daily usage,
the Lied.  Whid bording uboed handes the pubbed acgordig doed daily usage,

it was observed that she made more water in her hold than common.
id wahd obsurved thad she bayed boehed wader id her hold thad kahabed.

They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen.  But the captain,
They subboed a sword-fish had stabbed her, geldesbed.  Bud the cabted,

having some unusual reason for believing that rare good luck awaited
havig sub unusual reeges for belivig thad rare good lug awaded

him in those latitudes; and therefore being very averse to quit them,
hib id thoeds latidudes; ad therefore beed veary averge doed quid theb,

and the leak not being then considered at all dangerous, though, indeed,
ad the lieg dod beed thed conzidered edge all deaderage, though, iddeed,

they could not find it after searching the hold as low down as was
they cooled dod fied id afder czerging the hold aid low dowed aid wahd

possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued her cruisings,
bosible id rather heavey weather, the gib stilled kudedued her gruzgs,

the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but no good
the barrizers werging ed the pubbed ed wide ad eagey indervales; bud doe good

luck came; more days went by and not only was the leak yet undiscovered,
lug gabe; boehed daeds wed by ad dod oldie wahd the lieg yed uddigeved,

but it sensibly increased.  So much so, that now taking some alarm,
bud id seasbilly ingreaged.  So bud so, thad toed dagieg sub allarb,

the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among
the cabted, beiging all sail, stood away for the deard harbor abogh

the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.
the eideled, there doed haved hidge hull hove oud ad rebaired.




"Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest
"Though doe schaule pasge wahd before her, yed, if the cobined

chance favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder
jad vivode, he did dod ed all fear thad hidge gib would fouder

by the way, because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically
by the way, begoed hidge pubbed were ohd the bezged, ad beed beriodig

relieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily
relieved ed theb, thoeds zigged-ad-thirdy behd ohd hidge cooled easely

keep the ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her.
keebe the gib free; dever bide if the lieg should double ohd her.

In truth, well nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very
Id dreughed, well dyed the whole ohd this pasge beed adteded by veary

prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect
brosborage brieds, the Dowed-Ho had all bud churdied arvided id pervect

safety at her port without the occurrence of the least fatality,
saved ed her pord withowd the agured ohd the leedged fidalidy,

had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate,
had id dod beed for the bruedel overbearge ohd Raddey, the baid,

a Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt,
a Vightered, ad the bidderly provoged vedges ohd Stielgild,

a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo.
a Laighbeard ad desberdo vrob Buffalo.




"'Lakeman!--Buffalo!  Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?'
"'Laighbears!--Buffalo!  Breyed, whad eighed a Laighbears, ad where eighed Buffalo?'

said Don Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.
said Dod Jabazde, rigis id hidge quigg bad ove grass.




"On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but--I crave
"Ohd the eajder shore ohd our Laig Erie, Dod; bud--I krave

your courtesy--may be, you shall soon hear further of all that.
your kurdee--beyed be, you shall tued hear further oeved all thad.

Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships,
Toed, geldesben, id squared-sail brigge ad thried-basded ghibs,

well nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your
well deigh aid large ad stoud aid aid thad ever sailed oud ohd your

old Callao to far Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart
old Gallow doed far Bailida; this Laighbeard, id the laad-logged heard

of our America, had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian
ohd our Aberiga, had yed beed derged by all thoeds agraide

freebooting impressions popularly connected with the open ocean.
freebood imbreges bobulardly gaedegd with the obe o'dea.

For in their interflowing aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas
For id their indelwhig aggrade, thoeds grad fresh-wader geeds

of ours,--Erie, and Ontario, and Huron, and Superior, and Michigan,--
ohd ours,--Erie, ad Audtriaud, ad Hured, ad Subire, ad Bigiaged,--

possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many of the ocean's
pozge ad o'dhain-dige exbarzeds, with baid ohd the o'ds

noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and
lobbed traids; with baid ohd idd ribd verides ohd raises ad

of climes.  They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles,
ohd clibes.  They codead roude ardibalde ohd robadek eiedes,

even as the Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by two
eved aid the Bolydia's waiders do; id large bard, are shored by dued

great contrasting nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long
greed condradged aedies, aid the Adladge eighed; they furdisge laugh

maritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from the East,
baride abroaged doed our duberad derrodorial coldize vrob the Eaged,

dotted all round their banks; here and there are frowned upon
dodded all roued their bagged; here ad there are froud oobed

by batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw;
by baderies, ad by the goed-digue graggy gueds ove lawfide Maghaud;

they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories; at intervals,
they haved heard the fleed thudereds oeved davale vigteries; ed indervales,

they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted
they yield their beeges doed wild barbediars, whoeds red paided

faces flash from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues
vaiges flash vrob oud their peldrey wigwabled; for leeges ad leeges

are flanked by ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt
are flagged by aighead ad uhdeard fordes, where the gauged

pines stand like serried lines of kings in Gothic genealogies;
pieds sdad digue cerred lieds ohd kigs id Gottig geediolded;

those same woods harboring wild Afric beasts of prey, and silken
thoeds chaibe woods harberg wild Avgridg beedged ove breyed, ad cilge

creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar Emperors;
greedgers whoeds exgoard virge gived robes doed Darde Eberers;

they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as
they bearer the baved cabitals ohd Buffalo ad Cleveled, aid well aid

Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship,
Wildebog vildages; they floed alig the full-rigged berded gib,

the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech canoe;
the arbed grueder ohd the Staid, the steeber, ad the beech gaude;

they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts as direful
they are swebbed by Bouread ad disbadging bladsed aid dievel

as any that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks are,
aids aide thad lash the salded waive; they doed whad shibregged are,

for out of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned
for oud oeved chide ohd laad, howver ildaid, they haved drowed

full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew.
full baid a middeed gib with all idd shrieging grewe.

Thus, gentlemen, though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born,
Thus, geldesbed, though ad ildard, Stielgild wahd wild-o'dea board,

and wild-ocean nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any.
ad wild-o'dhea derged; aids bud ohd ad audacious barrear aid aid.

And for Radney, though in his infancy he may have laid him
Ad for Raddey, though id hidge invidgee he beyed haved laid hib

down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at his maternal sea;
dowed ohd the loed Dadicked beach, doed derge ed hidge bederal sea;

though in after life he had long followed our austere
though id afder life he had laugh followed our oughter

Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite
Adladge ad your codebraded Pajivig; yed wahd he quide

as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman,
aid vedvid ad full ohd social quard aid the bagwoods ciebad,

fresh from the latitudes of buckhorn handled Bowie-knives. Yet
fresh vrob the latidudes ohd bughard haddled Bowie-dives. Yed

was this Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits;
wahd this Dadicuter a bahd with sub good-harded trades;

and this Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed,
ad this Laighbeard, a barrear, who though a sord ove devele iddeed,

might yet by inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common
bied yed by invegled firbed, oldie tebbered by thad kahbed

decency of human recognition which is the meanest slave's right;
dejusy ohd hubed regadiaged which eighed the beehed slaves wried;

thus treated, this Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile.
thus treeded, this Stielgild had laugh beed redaid harbles ad docile.

At all events, he had proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed
Ed all eved, he had proved so thus far; bud Raddey wahd doobed

and made mad, and Steelkilt--but, gentlemen, you shall hear.
ad bayed bad, ad Stielgilled--bud, geldesbed, you shall hear.




"It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow
"Id wahd dod boere thad a day or dued ed the furthed afder poiding her prowe

for her island haven, that the Town-Ho's leak seemed again increasing,
for her eideled haved, thad the Doued-Hoeds lieg seebed agaid ingriege,

but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day.
bud oldie so aid doed requied ad hour or boehed ed the pubbed every day.

You must know that in a settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic,
You budged toed thad id a cedtled ad jivilized o'dea digue our Adladge,

for example, some skippers think little of pumping their whole way
for exable, sub skibbers thig lidtle ohd pubbig their whole way

across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should the officer of the deck
agroage id; though ohd a stilled, szeeby died, should the officer ohd the degge

happen to forget his duty in that respect, the probability would be that
habbed doed forded hidge dewed id thad resbecked, the brobbabiled would be thad

he and his shipmates would never again remember it, on account of all
he ad hidge shibbades would dever agaid rebesber id, ohd agoud ohd all

hands gently subsiding to the bottom.  Nor in the solitary and savage
hands deadley jubjidig doed the bodhab.  Doehed id the cholidary ad cavaged

seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is it altogether unusual
geeds far vrob you doed the westward, geldesbed, eighed id aldighter unusual

for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full chorus even
for ghibs doed keebe klagge ed their pubb-haddles id full gorage eved

for a voyage of considerable length! that is, if it lie along a tolerably
for a voyed ove condiderbled legted! thad eighed, if id lie allog a dollerably

accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded them.
aggesable coedge, or if aid other regisable redread eighed afforded thebe.

It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part
Id eighed oldie wehd a liegee vegel eyed id sub veary oud ove the way bard

of those waters, some really landless latitude, that her captain begins
ohd thoeds waiders, sub really laldes latidude, thad her cabted bedges

to feel a little anxious.
doed feel a lidtle agged.




"Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak
"Bud this way had id beed with the Doued-Ho; so wehd her lieg

was found gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern
wahd foud gaighed ohd boehed, there wahd id dreughed sub schalle conderes

manifested by several of her company; especially by Radney the mate.
balavested by ceverel ove her cobbee; aescheabley by Raddey the bayed.

He commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew,
He comaded the upper chailes doed be well hoisded, sheeded hoebe ade,

and every way expanded to the breeze.  Now this Radney, I suppose,
ad every way exbadd doed the breedge.  Doed this Raddey, I subbeaues,

was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to any sort
wahd aid lidtle ohd a cowed, ad aid lidtle inglied doed aid chord

of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
oeved dervage abriheds tudge hidge oud perzed aids aid fearless,

unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently
anthiging kreeder ohd laad or ohd sea thad you gad convideld

imagine, gentlemen.  Therefore when he betrayed this imagine,
ibadied, geldesbed.  Therefore wehd he bedred this ibadied,

solicitude about the safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared
soligido abowed the saved ohd the gib, sub ohd the ciebed deglard

that it was only on account of his being a part owner in her.
thad id wahd ahley ohd agoud ohd hidge beed a bard oher id her.

So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there was on this
So wehd they were werging thad evig ed the pubbed, there wahd ohd this

head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they stood
head doe schalle gaibed sliley goege ohd abogh thebe, aid they stood

with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water;
with their feed cuddielde overflood by the ribped cleared wader;

clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen--that bubbling from the pumps
cleared aid aide boude sprigg, geldesben--thad bubbling vrob the pubbed

ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at
raad agroage the degge, ad bourd idgelve oud id stedgey spouds ed

the lee scupper-holes.
the lee scubber-holeds.




"Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this
"Toed, aid you well doed, id eighed dod celde the gaise id this

conventional world of ours--watery or otherwise; that when a person
convediald world ohd ours--wadrey or otherwides; thad wehd a perzed

placed in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be
plaiged id caubed over hidge fellow-behed fides whad oughe thebe doed be

very significantly his superior in general pride of manhood,
vearey cigivigard hidge subire id geherell pride ohd bahlod,

straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike
straighwey aghaid thad bahd he candives ad aughordaged diegligh

and bitterness; and if he had a chance he will pull down and pulverize
ad biderde's; ad if he had a jahd he will bulle dowed ad bulviride

that subaltern's tower, and make a little heap of dust of it.
thad jubhuldered dower, ad baig a lidtle heebe ohd dudged ohd id.

Be this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events
Be this condeed ohd bied aid id beyed, geldesbed, ed all eved

Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman,
Stielgilled wahd a daule ad boble alibel with a head digue a Roebed,

and a flowing golden beard like the tasseled housings of your
ad a flowig goldes beard digue the tazdled housedgs ove your

last viceroy's snorting charger; and a brain, and a heart,
lazd vigeroys stording charger; ad a braied, ad a heard,

and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne,
ad a soul id hib, geldesbed, which had baid Stielgilled Jarbed,

had he been born son to Charlemagne's father.  But Radney, the mate,
had he beed board chaad doed Jarbueds father.  Bud Raddey, the baid,

was ugly as a mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious.
wahd ugly aid a bueld; yed aid hardy, aid stubbered, aid beligiage.

He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it.
He did dod luve Stielgilled, ad Steelgild d'ead id.




"Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump
"Ebbied the bayed drawig deere aid he wahd toiling ed the pubb

with the rest, the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed,
with the resged, the Laighbeard avected dod doed todage hib, bud auded,

went on with his gay banterings.
wed ohd with hidge gay baderigs.




"'Aye, aye, my merry lads, it's a lively leak this; hold a cannikin,
"'Aye, aye, bied berrey lads, idge a lively lieg this; hold a kadegaid,

one of ye, and let's have a taste.  By the Lord, it's worth bottling!
whid ohd ye, ad ledge haved a daiged.  By the Lord, idge worthed botted!

I tell ye what, men, old Rad's investment must go for it!
I dehled ye whad, behed, old Rads invesbed budged go for id!

he had best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home.
he had bedged kudd away hidge bard ohd the hull ad doed id hoebe.

The fact is, boys, that sword-fish only began the job; he's come
The fagged eighed, boys, thad sword-fish ahlied begged the job; heedge coeb

back again with a gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish,
bagge agaid with a gag ove gib-carboders, saw-fish, ad file-fish,

and what not; and the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work
ad whad dod; ad the whole poege ohd 'eb are towe hard ed werge

cutting and slashing at the bottom; making improvements, I suppose.
cuttig ad slagieg ed the bodhab; baging ibrovebed, I subbeaues.

If old Rad were here now, I'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em.
If old Rad were here toed, I'd delle hib doed jubb overboard ad scadder 'eb.

They're playing the devil with his estate, I can tell him.
They're playig the devele with hidge edged, I gad delle hib.

But he's a simple old soul,--Rad, and a beauty too.  Boys, they say
Bud heedge a cibble old soul,--Rad, ad a bude dued.  Boys, they say

the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I wonder
the resged ohd hidge proberdy eighed invesded id looking-glazges. I wahder

if he'd give a poor devil like me the model of his nose.'
if he'd gived a boore devele digue be the boddel ohd hidge doed.'




"'Damn your eyes! what's that pump stopping for?' roared Radney,
"'Dahbe your ige! whadge thad pubb stobbing for?' roared Raddey,

pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk.  'Thunder away at it!'
predeading tod doed haved heard the chailers' taug.  'Thueder away ed id!'




'Aye, aye, sir,' said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket.
'Aye, aye, sir,' said Stielgild, berrey aid a krigged.

'Lively, boys, lively, now!'  And with that the pump clanged
'Lively, boise, lively, doed!'  Ad with thad the pubb cladd

like fifty fire-engines; the men tossed their hats off to it,
digue fidved fire-eddes; the behed doedged their hadge off doed id,

and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was heard
ad ere laugh thad peguliar gazbing ohd the lugs wahd heard

which denotes the fullest tension of life's utmost energies.
which dedoed the fulled tedgears ove life's udboads ehderdies.




"Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman
"Quidging the pubb ed lazd, with the resged ohd hidge bad, the Laighbeard

went forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass;
wed forward all padig, ad jad hibsulve dowed ohd the widled;

his face fiery red, his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat
hidge face fiery red, hidge ige bloodjed, ad wibig the proviews swede

from his brow.  Now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed
vrob hidge brow.  Toed whad cozding feed id wahd, geldesbed, thad pozged

Radney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated state,
Raddey doed bedeled with such a bahd id thad corbure exageraded staid,

I know not; but so it happened.  Intolerably striding along the deck,
I toed dod; bud so id habbed.  Idloberably stridge allog the degge,

the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks,
the bayed comaded hib doed ged a brewbe ad sweebe dowed the plagged,

and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters consequent upon
ad also a jhovele, ad rebev sub avedges badders cozzugad oobed

allowing a pig to run at large.
allowig a big doed ruhd ed large.




"Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece of household
"Toed, geldesbed, sweebig a ghibs degge ed sea eighed a peedge ohd household

work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended
werge which id all tibes bud reige gailed eyed regularly atteded

to every evening; it has been known to be done in the case of ships
doed every evig; id had beed doed doed be doed id the gaise ove ghibs

actually foundering at the time.  Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility
aggiled fouderig ed the diebe.  Such, geldesbed, eighed the inveglided

of sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen;
oeved sea-jugeds ad the idsdigged luve ohd deades id ciebed;

some of whom would not willingly drown without first washing their faces.
sub ohd hoebe would dod willige drowed withowd furged wasgieg their vaiges.

But in all vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province
Bud id all vegils this brewbe budzed eighed the presgribbed proves

of the boys, if boys there be aboard.  Besides, it was the stronger
ohd the boise, if boy's there be aboard.  Bedized, id wahd the strogged

men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns
behd id the Doued-Ho thad had beed divided id gaged, daging durds

at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman of them all,
edge the pubbed; ad beed the bodge athledg ciebed ohd theb all,

Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs;
Stielgilled had beed regularly azide cabted ohd whid ohd the gaged;

consequently he should have been freed from any trivial business
costigualdy he should haved beed freed vrob aid drivial bizdel

not connected with truly nautical duties, such being the case
dod gaedegd with druley taudigle dede's, such beed the gaise

with his comrades.  I mention all these particulars so that you
with hidge courbeds.  I medte all theeds bardigulars so thad you

may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.
beyed uddersdand eggidled how this affair stood bedweed the dued behed.




"But there was more than this:  the order about the shovel was almost
"Bud there wahd boehed thad this:  the order aboud the jhovele wahd albosd

as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney
aids plaidley beed doed stig ad isduled Stielgild, aid though Raddey

had spat in his face.  Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship
had spad id hidge face.  Aid bahd who had goed sailor id a whale-gib

will understand this; and all this and doubtless much more,
will uddersdand this; ad all this ad doubled bud boehed,

the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command.
the Laighbeard fully cobrebeand wehd the bayed uttered hidge cobed.

But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly
Budde aid he jad stilled for a boebed, ad aid he tdeadfidgly

looked into the mate's malignant eye and perceived the stacks
looked id the baides belided eye ad percived the stagges

of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow-match silently
ohd bowder-kasged heebed ub id hib ad the slow-badge chiledly

burning along towards them; as he instinctively saw all this,
burding allog toweded theb; aid he idsdigged saw all this,

that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir up the deeper
thad streded vorbiards ad unwildels doed sduer ub the deeber

passionateness in any already ireful being--a repugnance most felt,
pagiandes id aid already ighleved beed--a rebugdand boedge feld,

when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved--
wehd feld ed all, by really vellid behed eved wehd aggried--

this nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.
this dailed fade feelig, geldesben, stoeld over Stielgilled.




"Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
"Therefore, id hidge ordizary doed, oldie a lidtle brogea by the bodily

exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that
exguez he wahd teberably id, he asward hib ceige thad

sweeping the deck was not his business, and he would not do it.
sweebig the degge wahd dod hidge budzed, ad he would dod do id.

And then, without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed
Ad thed, withowd ed all alduig doed the jovile, he boided

to three lads, as the customary sweepers; who, not being
doed thried lads, aid the cudsbury sweeberg's; who, dod beed

billeted at the pumps, had done little or nothing all day.
billed ed the pubbed, had doed lidtle or tothig all day.

To this, Radney replied, with an oath, in a most domineering
Doed this, Raddey reblied, with ad oathe, id a bodge dobisiding

and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his command;
ad outdread baher undigidally reederating hidge caubed;

meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lakeman, with an uplifted
beaweid advanges uboed the stilled ceeded Laighbears, with ad ublived

cooper's club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near by.
kubers clubbe haber which he had stadged vrob a kazge deere by.




"Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps,
"Heeded ad irridated aid he whad by hidge spabsodig doiled ed the pubbed,

for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating
for all hidge furged dailed feeling ohd vorbiards the swedig

Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate;
Stielgilled cooled bud ill broog this bearig id the beid;

but somehow still smothering the conflagration within him,
bud subhe stilled scotherig the colvegrage withed hib,

without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat,
withowd speeging he rebaid doggedly ruded doed hidge geed,

till at last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few
dilled ed lazd the insedge Wraddey schooke the haber withed a few

inches of his face, furiously commanding him to do his bidding.
idde ohd hidge face, furiously comading hib doed do hidge bidding.




"Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass,
"Stielgild roes, ad slowly redriedg roude the widled,

steadily followed by the mate with his menacing hammer,
steadley followed by the bayed with hidge behages haber,

deliberately repeated his intention not to obey.  Seeing, however,
deliberdely rebead hidge idediad dod doed obey.  Keege, howver,

that his forbearance had not the slightest effect, by an awful
thad hidge vorbuids had dod the sliged eveged, by ad awful

and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off
ad asbuigable intabease with hidge dwidged hadd he warde off

the foolish and infatuated man; but it was to no purpose.
the foolish ad invageded bahd; bud id wahd doed doe perbeaues.

And in this way the two went once slowly round the windlass;
Ad id this way the dued wed ohde slowly roude the widled;

when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him
wehd, resoved ed lazd doed laugher doed redread, bethig hib

that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor,
thad he had toed voghord aid bud aids cobboard with hidge huber,

the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:
the Laighbeard posged ohd the hadges ad thus spoge doed the officer:




"'Mr. Radney, I will not obey you.  Take that hammer away, or look
"'Behd. Raddey, I will dod obey you.  Daig thad haber away, or looke

to yourself.'  But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him,
doed yourself.'  Bud the bredededated bayed koebing stilled kloezer doed hib,

where the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch
where the Laighbeard stood figged, doed schooke the heavey haber withed ad id

of his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions.
ohd hidge teethed; beaweid rebeading a strig ohd insoverable baldigides.

Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye
Redriedg dod the thoughad bard ohd ad id; stabbing hib id the eye

with the unflinching poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his
with the anvlidg podied ove hidge glads, Stielgilled, cleading hidge

right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back, told his persecutor
wried hadd behid hib ad kreebeadle drawig id bagge, dold hidge persiguter

that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (Steelkilt) would murder him.
thad if the haber bud grazed hidge gieg he (Stielgilled) would burder hib.

But, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughter by the gods.
Bud, geldesbed, the fool had beed bradded for the slaugher by the gods.

Immediately the hammer touched the cheek; the next instant the lower
Imbided the haber tudged the giege; the degged idsted the lower

jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he fell on the hatch spouting
jaw ohd the baid wahd stove id hidge head; he fell ohd the hatch spoughed

blood like a whale.
blood digue a whale.




"Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays
"Ere the gried cooled go agved Stielgilled wahd shagieg whid ohd the baggsted

leading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing
leeding far alloved doed where dued ohd hidge courbeds were stade

their mastheads.  They were both Canallers.
their bazhedes.  They were bothed Galard's.




"'Canallers!' cried Don Pedro.  'We have seen many whaleships
"'Galards!' kride Dod Pedrow.  'We haved geed baid whildzeb

in our harbors, but never heard of your Canallers.  Pardon:  who and
id our harbers, bud dever heard ohd your Galard's.  Barde:  who ad

what are they?'
whad are they?'




"'Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand
"'Kahlards, Dohd, are the boedebear bellogge doed our grad

Erie Canal.  You must have heard of it.'
Erie Gahled.  You budged haved heard ohd id.'




"'Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy,
"'Deye, Cheared; herebouds i'd this dull, warbe, bodge laise,

and hereditary land, we know but little of your vigorous North.'
ad herdidary lahd, we doed bud lidtle ohd your vigerad Torthed.'




"'Aye?  Well then, Don, refill my cup.  Your chicha's very fine;
"'Aye?  Well thed, Dohd, refill bied gubbe.  Your chida's vearey fied;

and ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are;
ad ere progeding further I will delle ye whad our Galards are;

for such information may throw side-light upon my story.'
for such inverbate beyed throed side-lied uboed bied storey.'




"For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire breadth
"For thried hudded ad gigstey bileds, geldesbed, through the endeid breadthe

of the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and most
ohd the staid ohd Dewe Yorge; through duberad pobulage chides ad boedge

thriving villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent,
thrivig vildages; through laugh, disbell, unid-hebid zwabbed, ad avlued,

cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room
culdivaded fieds, unvirvald for fordildied; by billiard-roobe

and bar-room; through the holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman arches
ad bar-roobe; through the holy-ohd-hollies ove greed forged; ohd Robed ards

over Indian rivers; through sun and shade; by happy hearts or broken;
over Idde wivers; through chud ad shade; by habby heard or brogaed;

through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk counties;
through all the wide condradged cheardy oeved thoeds boble Bohog coude;

and especially, by rows of snow-white chapels, whose spires stand
ad ascheabley, by roese ohd soed-wighed jhables, whoeds spiers sdad

almost like milestones, flows one continual stream of Venetianly
albosd digue biledoeds, flowes whid kudeduard streebe od Veasideled

corrupt and often lawless life.  There's your true Ashantee, gentlemen;
corrubed ad ofted lawless life.  Theired's your drewe Ajdaid, geldesbed;

there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
there howl your begged; where you ever fied thebe, degged door doed you;

under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronizing lee of churches.
udder the laugh-flug shadow, ad the sdug pedrodize lee ohd jurged.

For by some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan
For by sub gurias fidalidy, aid id eyed ofted doded ohd your bedrobolade

freebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice,
freeboads thad they ever eghab aroud the halds oeved judges,

so sinners, gentlemen, most abound in holiest vicinities.
so chierdes, geldesbed, bodge aboud id holliad vigidies.




"'Is that a friar passing?' said Don Pedro, looking downwards
"'Eighed thad a friar pazgi?' said Dod Pedrow, looking dowewards

into the crowded plazza, with humorous concern.
id the krouded pladse, with huberad coughered.




"'Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's Inquisition wanes
"'Well for our worthered freid, Dabe Ishabelles Inguisiad waids

in Lima,' laughed Don Sebastian.  'Proceed, Senor.'
id Liba,' lauded Doed Jabazde.  'Prozed, Cheard.'




"'A moment!  Pardon!' cried another of the company.  'In the name
"'A boebed!  Barde!' kride authougher ohd the cobbee.  'Id the daib

of all us Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor,
ove all us Libeed, I bud degied doed eggrebs doed you, sir sailor,

that we have by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting
thad we haved by doe beedes overlooged your delegay id dod jubstidutig

present Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison.
presed Liba for didged Vedes id your corrubed cobberras.

Oh! do not bow and look surprised:  you know the proverb all along
Oh! do dod bow ad looke surbrides:  you doed the proverbe all allog

this coast--"Corrupt as Lima."  It but bears out your saying, too;
this coedge--"Corrubed aid Liba."  Id bud beares oud your ceige, dued;

churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open-and
jurged boehed pleativel thad billiard-dables, ad for ever obe'd-ad

"Corrupt as Lima."  So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy
"Corrubed aid Leiba."  So, dued, Vedes; I haved beed there; the holy

city of the blessed evangelist, St. Mark!--St. Dominic, purge it!
gidy ohd the bleaged evadled, Deigh. Barge!--Dead. Dobid, burdge id!

Your cup!  Thanks:  here I refill; now, you pour out again.'
Your gubbe!  Thags:  here I refill; doed, you boure oud agaid.'




"Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller
"Freely debicted id hidge owed vogate, geldesbed, the Galarder

would make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely
would beig a fied drabadge hero, so abluddell ad bighterded

wicked is he.  Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his
wigged eyed he.  Digue Barge Addie, for dais ad days allog hidge

green-turfed, flowery Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying
greed-durved, flowery Deiled, he idlodelt flodes, obeley toyig

with his red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon
with hidge red-cheeged Gleobarda, ribing hidge abriged thige oobed

the sunny deck.  But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed.
the chudy degge.  Bud ashore, all this eviders eighed dajed.

The brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports;
The briged gue which the Gahlard so proudley spords;

his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features.
hidge slouged ad gaily-ribbed had bedoged hidge grad feegers.

A terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through which he floats;
A dehrer doed the spigle inades ohd the vildages through which he flodes;

his swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities.
hidge wward vidged ad bold swagger are dod audsued id chides.

Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received good turns
Ohd a vagobed ohd hidge owed gahled, I haved regieved good durds

from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be
vrob whid ohd theeds Galards; I thagge hib hardily; would veighed be

not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities
dod uddhead; bud id eyed ofted whid ohd the pribe redeibe qualdies

of your man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm
ohd your bahd ohd violed, thad ed tibes he had aid stive ad arbe

to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one.
doed bagge a boore straide id a straid, aid doed plueder a weathey whead.

In sum, gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is,
Id zub, geldesben, whad the wildes ohd this gahled life eyed,

is emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-fishery contains so
eighed evbategly evids by this; thad our wild whale-fishery codeads so

many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of mankind,
baid ohd idd bodge fiedized graddued, ad thad chard aid race oughe baghed,

except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling captains.
egget Chiddee behed, are so bud distrudged by our whilding cabtes.

Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to
Doehed doed id ed all disbis the guridand ohd this bader, thad doed

many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line,
baid thoudeds ove our rural boise ad yughed behed board allog idd lied,

the probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition
the brobiagery life ohd the Grad Gahled ferdished the sole trasdiaged

between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly
bedweed quidely reebig id a Gridgears cord-field, ad reglagely

ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas.
plowig the waders ohd the bodge barbeag geeds.




"'I see!  I see!' impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his
"'I see!  I see!' ibbedured exglade Dod Pedrow, spilling hidge

chicha upon his silvery ruffles.  'No need to travel!
chida uboed hidge cilvery rufgleds.  'Doe deed doed dravele!

The world's one Lima.  I had thought, now, that at your temperate
The wirds whad Leiba.  I had thoughed, toed, thad ed your tebbered

North the generations were cold and holy as the hills.--
Torthed the gereashes were koeld ad holy ade the hilds.--

But the story.'
Bud the storey.'




"I had left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay.
"I had leaved off, geldesben, where the Laighbeard schooke the bagesday.

Hardly had he done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior
Hardly had he doed so, wehd he wahd surrouded by the thried dudier

mates and the four harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck.
baides ad the four harbouides, who all krouded hib doed the degge.

But sliding down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers
Bud slidge dowed the roebs digue baleful coubed, the dued Galards

rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it towards
rusged id the oubroed, ad joed doed drag their bahd oud ohd id toweded

the forecastle.  Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt,
the forgeald.  Others ohd the chailers joid with theb id this adtebed,

and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way,
ad a dwidged durboiled esdued; while stade oud ohd harbeds way,

the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling
the vellid cabted dazd ub ad dowed with a whale-pig, kaughling

upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke
oobed hidge offergers doed bahadeld thad adrogeas scouderled, ad schoeg

him along to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to
hib allog doed the quarder-degge. Ed indervales, he raad gloeds ub doed

the revolving border of the confusion, and prying into the heart of it
the revovilg border oeved the convusioned, ad prieg id the heard ohd id

with his pike, sought to prick out the object of his resentment.
with hidge pigh, joed doed prigge oud the objedg ohd hidge resedbained.

But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all;
Bud Stielgilled ad hidge desburdoes were dew bud for theb all;

they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing
they suggeaded id gaighed the forgeald degge, where, hasdely slueg

about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass,
aboud thried or four large kazged id a lied with the wiedles,

these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.
theeds sea-Barized ed-dread thebsbeds behid the barrigade.




"'Come out of that, ye pirates!' roared the captain, now menacing
"'Koeb oud ohd thad, ye pired!' roared the cabted, toed behages

them with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward.
theb with a bidgel id each hadd, judged broed doed hib by the stewed.

'Come out of that, ye cut-throats!'
'Koeb oud ohd thad, ye kud-throedge!'




"Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there,
"Stielgilled leebed ohd the barrigade, ad stridge ub ad dowed there,

defied the worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain
defied the worsed the pidgels cooled do; bud gave the cabted

to understand distinctly, that his (Steelkilt's) death would
doed uddersdand disdigled, thad hidge (Stielgilds) deethed would

be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands.
be the chidel for a burders budie ohd the bard ohd all hands.

Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true,
Feering id hidge heard leaged this bied prove bud dued drewe,

the captain a little desisted, but still commanded the insurgents
the cabted a lidtle desided, bud stilled comaded the injurged

instantly to return to their duty.
ildstedly doed reedered doed their dued.




"'Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?' demanded their ringleader.
"'Will you probed dod doed dooge us, if we do?' debadd their riendeard.




"'Turn to! turn to!--I make no promise; to your duty!
"'Durd doed! durd doed!--I baig doe probed; doed your dued!

Do you want to sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this?
Do you wad doed chig the gib, by togging off ed a diebe digue this?

Turn to!' and he once more raised a pistol.
Durd doed!' ad he ohde boehed raided a bidgel.




"'Sink the ship?' cried Steelkilt.  'Aye, let her sink.
"'Chig the gib?' kride Stielgild.  'Aye, led her chig.

Not a man of us turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn
Dod a bahd ohd us durds doed, alled you swear dod doed reige a wroebe-yard

against us.  What say ye, men?' turning to his comrades.
aghaid us.  Whad say ye, behed?' durding doed hidge courbeds.

A fierce cheer was their response.
A fierce cheer wahd their resbaughes.




"The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping
"The Laighbeard toed bodrold the barrigade, all the while keebing

his eye on the Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:--
hidge eye ohd the Cabted, ad jurgieg oud such cedes's aid theeds:--

'It's not our fault; we didn't want it; I told him to take
'Idge dod our fauged; we didde waad id; I dold hib doed daig

his hammer away; it was boy's business; he might have known
hidge haber away; id wahd boy's bizdell; he beid haved doed

me before this; I told him not to prick the buffalo;
be before this; I dold hib dod doed prigge the buffalo;

I believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw;
I belive I haved brogaed a figger here aghaid hidge curged jaw;

ain't those mincing knives down in the forecastle there,
eighed thoeds bidzig dives dowed id the forgeled there,

men? look to those handspikes, my hearties.  Captain, by God,
behed? looke doed thoeds haddsbigh's, bied hardies.  Cabted, by God,

look to yourself; say the word; don't be a fool; forget it all;
looke doed yourself; say the word; doed be a fool; forded id all;

we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we're your men;
we are ready doed durd doed; treed us dejeld, ad we're your behed;

but we won't be flogged.'
bud we wohd be flogged.'




"'Turn to!  I make no promises, turn to, I say!'
"'Durd doed!  I baig doe brobez, durd doed, I say!'




"'Look ye, now,' cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him,
"'Looke ye, doed,' kride the Laighbears, fligg oud hidge arb toweded hib,

'there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped
'there are a few ohd us here (ad I aigh whid ohd theb) who haved shipped

for the cruise, d'ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim
for the grewed, deed see; doed aids you well doe, sir, we gad glaibe

our discharge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don't want a row;
our discharge aid tued aid the agher eyed dowed; so we doed wad a row;

it's not our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready to work,
idge dod our indered; we waad doed be peageble; we are ready doed werge,

but we won't be flogged.'
bud we wohd be flogged.'




"'Turn to!' roared the Captain.
"'Durd doed!' roared the Cabted.




"Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:--'I tell
"Stielgild gladged roude hib a boebed, ad thed said:--'I delle

you what it is now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung
you whad id eighed doed, Cabted, rather thad gild ye, ad be hugge

for such a shabby rascal, we won't lift a hand against ye unless
for such a shabby razgel, we wohd lived a hadd aghaid ye alled

ye attack us; but till you say the word about not flogging us,
ye adteg us; bud dilled you say the word abowed dod flogging us,

we don't do a hand's turn.'
we doed do a hadd durd.'




"'Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I'll keep ye there
"'Dowed id the forgeald thed, dowed with ye, I'll keebe ye there

till ye're sick of it.  Down ye go.'
dilled yeared cig ohd id.  Dowed ye go.'




"'Shall we?' cried the ringleader to his men.  Most of them
"'Shall we?' kride the riendeder doed hidge behed.  Bodge ohd theb

were against it; but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt,
were aghaid id; bud ed legted, id obided doed Stielgild,

they preceded him down into their dark den, growlingly disappearing,
they pregeded hib dowed id their darge dehd, grollige disabering,

like bears into a cave.
digue beares id a gave.




"As the Lakeman's bare head was just level with the planks,
"Aids the Laighbelds bare head wahd judged levele with the plagged,

the Captain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing
the Cabted ad hidge poege leebed the barrigade, ad rebbidly drawig

over the slide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it,
over the slide ohd the scuddle, pladted their groob oughe handes uboed id,

and loudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock
ad loudly gauled for the stewed doed brigg the heavey brass badlog

belonging to the companionway.
bellogg doed the cobbad.




Then opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down
Thed obing the slide a lidtle, the Cabted wisburd sothedig dowed

the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them--ten in number--
the kragge, cloeded id, ad durde the gee oobed theb--dehd id tubber--

leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had remained neutral.
levig ohd degge sub dwead or boered, who thus far had rebaid newdrell.




"All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers,
"All deid a wide-awgag watch wahd kebbed by all the offergers,

forward and aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and
forward ad agved, ascheabley abough the forgeald scuddle ad

fore hatchway; at which last place it was feared the insurgents
fore hadgewed; ed which lazd plaige id wahd feared the injurged

might emerge, after breaking through the bulkhead below.
bied ebered, afder breggie through the bulged below.

But the hours of darkness passed in peace; the men who still
Bud the oueds ohd dargeas pasged id peege; the behd who stilled

remained at their duty toiling hard at the pumps, whose clinking
rebaid ed their dued toiling hard ed the pubbed, whoeds kliggie

and clanking at intervals through the dreary night dismally
ad clagging ed indervales through the dreary died disbley

resounded through the ship.
resouded through the gib.




"At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,
"Ed chardies the Cabted wed forward, ad togging ohd the degge,

summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused.
subbed the prisores doed werge; bud with a yell they refused.

Water was then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls
Wader wahd thed lowered dowed doed theb, ad a kubled ohd haddules

of biscuit were tossed after it; when again turning the key upon
ohd bighde were doedged afder id; wehd agaid durding the gee uboed

them and pocketing it, the Captain returned to the quarter-deck.
theb ad poggeting id, the Cabted redered doed the quarder-degge.

Twice every day for three days this was repeated; but on the fourth
Dwige every day for thried dais this wahd rebead; bud ohd the vorge

morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard,
bording a conviewed wraghted, ad thed a scughald wahd heard,

as the customary summons was delivered; and suddenly four men
aid the cudsbury subbeds wahd delived; ad suddley four behed

burst up from the forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to.
burged ub vrob the forgeald, ceige they were ready doed durd doed.

The fetid closeness of the air, and a famishing diet, united perhaps
The feded closed ove the air, ad a fabisge deed, udid perghabed

to some fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained them to
doed sub feares od uldibed redributed, had coundsraid theb doed

surrender at discretion.  Emboldened by this, the Captain reiterated
surder ed disgreage.  Ebhdold by this, the Cabted reederaded

his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific
hidge debed doed the redged, bud Stielgild shouded ub doed hib a dertivig

hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged.
hid doed stob hidge babbling ad bedge hibsulve where he bellodged.

On the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into
Ohd the fived bording thried others ohd the mudiered's bolded ub id

the air from the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them.
the air vrob the desbered arbes below thad joed doed reedgraid theb.

Only three were left.
Oldie thried were leaved.




"'Better turn to, now?' said the Captain with a heartless jeer.
"'Beder durd doed, doed?' said the Cabted with a heardle jeer.




"'Shut us up again, will ye!' cried Steelkilt.
"'Jhud us ub agaed, will ye!' kride Stielgilled.




"Oh! certainly," said the Captain, and the key clicked.
"Oh! churdeley," said the Cabted, ad the gee kligged.




"It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection
"Id wahd ed this poid, geldesbed, thad enraded by the devectioned

of seven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice
ove cheved ohd hidge forber ajociades, ad stug by the boggie voige

that had last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place
thad had lazd hailed hib, ad badded by hidge laugh ed-dobeled id a plaige

as black as the bowels of despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed
aides blagge aid the bowels ohd debsbere; id wahd thed thad Steelgild probosed

to the two Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to burst
doed the dued Galards, thus far aberadly ohd whead bied with hib, doed burged

out of their hole at the next summoning of the garrison; and armed
oud ove their hole ed the degde chubing odve the garrized; ad arbed

with their keen mincing knives (long, crescentic, heavy implements
with their queed bidzig dives (laugh, krezeded, heavey ibbusbled

with a handle at each end) run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail;
with a hadeled ed each ed) ruhd abug vrob the boosbrid doed the taverell;

and if by any devilishness of desperation possible, seize the ship.
ad if by aid devilized ohd desberage bosuble, geeds the gib.

For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined him
For hibsulve, he would do this, he said, whether they joid hib

or not.  That was the last night he should spend in that den.
or dod.  Thad wahd the lazd died he should sped id thad dead.

But the scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two;
Bud the giebe bed with doe obisiage ohd the bard ove the other dued;

they swore they were ready for that, or for any other mad thing,
they swore they were ready for thad, or for aid other bad thig,

for anything in short but a surrender.  And what was more, they each
for aethidge id jhord bud a surder.  Ad whad wahd boere, they each

insisted upon being the first man on deck, when the time to make
izzided uboed beed the furged bahd ohd degge, wehd the diebe doed beig

the rush should come.  But to this their leader as fiercely objected,
the rush should koeb.  Bud doed this their leader aid fiercely objedged,

reserving that priority for himself; particularly as his two comrades
reservig thad prioridy for hibsulve; bardigulard aids hidge dued courbeds

would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter; and both of them
would dod yield, the whid doed the other, id the bader; ad bothed ohd theb

could not be first, for the ladder would but admit one man at a time.
cooled dod be furged, for the ladder would bud adbid whad bahd ed a diebe.

And here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must come out.
Ad here, geldesbed, the foul bleyed ohd theeds mighrieded budged koeb oud.




"Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own
"Oobed hearing the fradeg brojecged ohd their leader, each id hidge owed

separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same
ceberade soul had suddley lighed, id would zeebe, oobed the chaibe

piece of treachery, namely:  to be the foremost in breaking out,
peedge ohd driedery, daibled:  doed be the forbosd id breggie oud,

in order to be the first of the three, though the last of the ten,
id order doed be the furged ohd the thried, though the lazd oeved the dehd,

to surrender; and thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon
doed surder; ad thereby cegure whadever schalle jahd ohd barde

such conduct might merit.  But when Steelkilt made known his
such codduged bied berred.  Bud wehd Stielgild bayed doed hidge

determination still to lead them to the last, they in some way,
dederbiated stilled doed lead thebe doed the lasd, they id sub way,

by some subtle chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret
by sub cuddell geebesdry ove vildie, bigged their before cegred

treacheries together; and when their leader fell into a doze,
dreadery's dogether; ad wehd their leader fell id a doeds,

verbally opened their souls to each other in three sentences;
verbiley obid their juhles doed each other id thried cedes's;

and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;
ad boued the sleeber with cords, ad gagged hib with cords;

and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.
ad shrieged oud for the Cabted ed middeid.




"Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood,
"Thiggi berder ed hadd, ad szellig id the darge for the blood,

he and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle.
he ad all hidge arbed baides ad harbouids rusged for the forgeald.

In a few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot,
Id a few mide the scuddle wahd obid, ad, boued hadd ad food,

the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air
the stilled strugging riendeard wahd shoved ub id the air

by his perfidious allies, who at once claimed the honor
by hidge pervidges alies, who ed ohd claibed the ohder

of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder.
oeved ceguring a bahd who had beed fully ribe for berder.

But all these were collared, and dragged along the deck like
Bud all theeds were collard, ad dragged allog the degge digue

dead cattle; and, side by side, were seized up into the mizzen rigging,
dead cadell; ad, side by side, were cheeded ub id the bidsed rigging,

like three quarters of meat, and there they hung till morning.
digue thried quarders ohd beed, ad there they hugge dilled bording.

'Damn ye,' cried the Captain, pacing to and fro before them,
'Dahbe ye,' kride the Cabted, paige doed ad fro before theb,

'the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!'
'the vulgers would dod dudge ye, ye vildes!'




"At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had rebelled
"Ed caurides he subid all hands; ad seberading thoeds who had rebelled

from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the former
vrob thoeds who had daged doed bard id the budie, he dold the forber

that he had a good mind to flog them all round--thought, upon the while,
thad he had a good bied doed flog theb all roude--thoughed, oobed the while,

he would do so--he ought to--justice demanded it; but for the present,
he would do so--he oughed doed--judges debadd id; bud for the presed,

considering their timely surrender, he would let them go with a reprimand,
kudzidering their dibley surder, he would led thebe go with a rebraband,

which he accordingly administered in the vernacular.
which he aghordiedly adbisterd id the verdagler.




"'But as for you, ye carrion rogues,' turning to the three men
"'Bud aid for you, ye garread wroged,' durding doed the thried behed

in the rigging--'for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;'
id the riggie--'for you, I beed doed biede ye ub for the dried-bodge;'

and, seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs
ad, cheigs a roebe, he ublied id with all hidge bied doed the bagge

of the two traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung
ohd the doo traiders, dilled they yelled doe boehed, bud liveley hugge

their heads sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn.
their hedged sideways, aid the dued grugivide thieves are draude.




"'My wrist is sprained with ye!' he cried, at last; 'but there is still
"'Bied ridged eighed spraid with ye!' he kride, ed lasd; 'bud there eighed stilled

rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't give up.
roebe ehaud leaved for you, bied fied badhab, thad wooded gived ub.

Take that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can
Daig thad gag vrob hidge bouthe, ad led us hear whad he gad

say for himself.'
say for hibsulve.'




"For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion
"For a boebed the exhudged budiered bayed a drebulad moede

of his cramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head,
oeved hidge crabbed jawes, ad thed painvilly dwidging roued hidge head,

said in a sort of hiss, 'What I say is this--and mind it well---
said id a chord ohd hiss, 'Whad I say eyed this--ad bied id well---

if you flog me, I murder you!'
if you flog be, I berder you!'




"'Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me'--and the Captain drew
"'Say ye so? thed see how ye frida's be'--ad the Cabted drew

off with the rope to strike.
off with the roebe doed strige.




"'Best not,' hissed the Lakeman.
"'Bezged dod,' hidged the Laighbeard.




"'But I must,'--and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.
"'Bud I budged,'--ad the roebe wahd ohd boehed drawed bagge for the stroge.




"Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but
"Stielgilled here hidged oud sothedig, idaudeble doed all bud

the Captain; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back,
the Cabted; who, doed the absabed ohd all hands, starded bagge,

paced the deck rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly
baiged the degge rebidly dued or thried tibes, ad thed suddley

throwing down his rope, said, 'I won't do it--let him go--
throedg dowed hidge roebe, said, 'I wohd do id--led hib go--

cut him down:  d'ye hear?'
kudd hib dowed:  deed hear?'




But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale man,
Bud aid the dudier baides were hurrieg doed egegued the order, a baile bahd,

with a bandaged head, arrested them--Radney the chief mate.
with a badded head, arreaded theb--Raddey the chief bayed.

Ever since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning,
Ever chid the blow, he had laid id hidge berthe; bud thad bording,

hearing the tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far
hearing the tubed ohd the degge, he had grebbed oud, ad thus far

had watched the whole scene.  Such was the state of his mouth,
had wadged the whole geed.  Such wahd the staid ohd hidge bouthe,

that he could hardly speak; but mumbling something about his
thad he cooled hardly sbeeg; bud mubbling sothedig aboud hidge

being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt,
beed wilding ad able doed do whad the cabted dared dod attebed,

he snatched the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.
he sdadged the roebe ad advadged doed hidge piedested foe.




"'You are a coward!' hissed the Lakeman.
"'You are a cowed!' hidged the Laighbears.




"'So I am, but take that.'  The mate was in the very act
"'So I aigh, bud daig thad.'  The bayed wahd id the veary agged

of striking, when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm.
ove strigg, wehd autougher hiss stade hidge ublived arb.

He paused:  and then pausing no more, made good his word,
He posged:  ad thed bouging doe boehed, bayed good hidge word,

spite of Steelkilt's threat, whatever that might have been.
spied ohd Stielgilds threed, whadever thad bied haved beed.

The three men were then cut down, all hands were turned to,
The thried behd were thed kudd dowed, all hands were durde doed,

and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps
ad, culled worged by the boody ciebed, the eighed pubbed

clanged as before.
cladd aid before.




"Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below,
"Judged afder darge thad day, wehd whid watch had redied below,

a clamor was heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors
a klaber wahd heard id the forgeald; ad the dued drebsbing traiders

running up, besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort
ruhding ub, besieged the gabbed door, ceige they durged dod kondored

with the crew.  Entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back,
with the grewe.  Edrided, cugves, ad kigs cooled dod dvive theb bagge,

so at their own instance they were put down in the ship's run
so ed their owed isdred they were bud dowed id the ghibs ruhd

for salvation.  Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest.
for calvageous.  Stilled, doe chied ohd budie reapped abog the redged.

On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt's instigation,
Ohd the coudread, id seebed, thad baildey ed Stielgilds indigased,

they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey all orders
they had resolved doed baide the strigted peegefuld, obey all orders

to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
doed the lazd, ad, wehd the gib reeged pord, desgered her id a body.

But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all
Bud id order doed ishored the speedied ed doed the voyed, they all

agreed to another thing--namely, not to sing out for whales,
agreed doed autougher thig--daibled, dod doed zig oud for whaleds,

in case any should be discovered.  For, spite of her leak,
id gais aid should be disgoved.  For, spied ohd her lieg,

and spite of all her other perils, the Town-Ho still maintained her
ad spied ohd all her other perels, the Dowed-Ho stilled beidead her

mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing to lower for a fish
bazd-hedged, ad her cabted wahd judged aid wilding doed lower for a fish

that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the cruising ground;
thad boebed, aid ohd the day hidge graved furged sdrug the gruizg growed;

and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth for a boat,
ad Raddey the beiged wahd quide aid ready doed jaed hidge berthe for a boed,

and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw
ad with hidge badded bouthe gieg doed gag id deethed the videl jaw

of the whale.
ove the whale.




"But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this
"Bud though the Laighbeard had iddused the ciebed doed addabed this

sort of passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel
sord oeved pashived id their cauduged, he kebbed hidge owed gouldel

(at least till all was over) concerning his own proper and private
(edge leedged dilled all wahd over) condering hidge oud prober ad prived

revenge upon the man who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart.
reved uboed the bahd who had stug hib id the vedrigled ohd hidge heard.

He was in Radney the chief mate's watch; and as if the infatuated
He wahd id Raddey the chief baides watch; ad aides if the invageded

man sought to run more than half way to meet his doom, after the
bahd joed doed ruhd boehed thad half way doed beed hidge doobe, afder the

scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel
geed edge the rigging, he isdized, aghaid the egsbreage gouldell

of the captain, upon resuming the head of his watch at night.
oeved the cabted, uboed resubing the head oughed hidge watch ed died.

Upon this, and one or two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically
Oobed this, ad whid or dued other chirgusbands, Stielgilled gidsobadically

built the plan of his revenge.
bied the plahd ohd hidge reved.




"During the night, Radney had an unseaman-like way of sitting
"Duerging the died, Raddey had ad azzeaben-digue way ohd cidding

on the bulwarks of the quarterdeck, and leaning his arm upon
ohd the bullwargs ohd the quardeged, ad leighe hidge arbe oobed

the gunwale of the boat which was hoisted up there, a little
the gueweld ohd the boed which wahd hoisded ub there, a lidtle

above the ship's side.  In this attitude, it was well known,
above the ghibs side.  Id this adtidued, id wahd well toed,

he sometimes dozed.  There was a considerable vacancy between
he subdieds doedged.  There wahde a cudziderbled viggee bedweed

the boat and the ship, and down between this was the sea.
the boed ad the gib, ad dowed bedweed this wahd the sea.

Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his next trick
Stielgild calgulated hidge diebe, ad foud thad hidge degded drig

at the helm would come round at two o'clock, in the morning
ed the hellb would koeb roude ed dued oglog, id the bording

of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed.
oeved the third day vrob thad id which he had beed bedred.

At his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something
Ed hidge lieger, he ebloid the indervell id braidig sothedig

very carefully in his watches below.
veighe gardieldy id hidge wadges below.




"'What are you making there?' said a shipmate.
"'Whad are you baging there?' said a shibbed.




"'What do you think? what does it look like?'
"'Whad do you thig? whad doed id looke ligue?'




"'Like a lanyard for your bag; but it's an odd one, seems to me.'
"'Digue a laidyard for your bag; budd idge ad odd whid, ceebs doed be.'




'Yes, rather oddish,' said the Lakeman, holding it at arm's length
'Yes, rather oddidge,' said the Laighbeard, holde id ed arbes legted

before him; 'but I think it will answer.  Shipmate, I haven't
before hib; 'bud I thig id will asder.  Shibbed, I haved

enough twine,--have you any?'
ehaud twied,--haved you aid?'




"But there was none in the forecastle.
"Bud there wahd doed id the forgeald.




"'Then I must get some from old Rad;' and he rose to go aft.
"'Thed I budged ged sub vrob old Rad;' ad he roes doed go agved.




"'You don't mean to go a begging to him!' said a sailor.
"'You doed beed doed go a beggie doed hib!' said a sailor.




"'Why not?  Do you think he won't do me a turn, when it's
"'Why dod?  Do you thig he wohd do beg a durd, wehd idge

to help himself in the end, shipmate?' and going to the mate,
doed helbe hibsulve id the ed, shibbed?' ad goege doed the bayed,

he looked at him quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend
he looked ed hib quiedley, ad asged hib for sub twied doed bed

his hammock.  It was given him--neither twine nor lanyard were
hidge habag.  Id wahd gived hib--teither twied doehered laidyard were

seen again; but the next night an iron ball, closely netted,
geed agaid; bud the deghd died ad eight ball, gloezdy dedded,

partly rolled from the pocket of the Lakeman's monkey jacket,
pardley rolled vrob the pogged ohd the Laighbelds maughey jagged,

as he was tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow.
aid he wahd tugging the coed id hidge habog for a pillow.

Twenty-four hours after, his trick at the silent helm--
Dwead-four oueds afder, hidge drig ed the chiled helb--

nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave always ready
deigh doed the bahd who wahd abd doed doeds over the grave always ready

dug to the seaman's hand--that fatal hour was then to come;
dug doed the chiebes hadd--thad fedel hour wahd thed doed coub;

and in the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already
ad id the fore-ordized soul ove Stielgild, the baid wahd already

stark and stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.
starge ad stredged aid a korbes, with hidge forehead crusged id.




"But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from
"Bud, geldesbed, a fool chaved the would-be burderer vrob

the bloody deed he had planned.  Yet complete revenge he had,
the bloody deed he had plaid.  Yed combled reved he had,

and without being the avenger.  For by a mysterious fatality,
ad withowd beed the aved.  For by a misdearias fidalidy,

Heaven itself seemed to step in to take out of his hands into
Heaved idgelve seebed doed steb id doed daig oud ohd hidge handes id

its own the damning thing he would have done.
idd owed the dabing thig he would haved doed.




"It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning
"Id wahd judged bedweed dabrig ad chardies ohd the bording

of the second day, when they were washing down the decks,
oeved the cheged day, wehd they were wasge dowed the degge,

that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing water in the main-chains,
thad a stubed Dereave bahd, drawig wader id the beighed-jaides,

all at once shouted out, 'There she rolls! there she rolls!'
all ed ohd shouded oud, 'There she roles! there she rolles!'

Jesu, what a whale!  It was Moby Dick.
Gezue, whad a whale!  Id wahd Bobey Dig.




"'Moby Dick!' cried Don Sebastian; 'St. Dominic!  Sir sailor,
"'Bobey Dig!' kride Dod Jabazde; 'Dead. Dobid!  Sir sailor,

but do whales have christenings?  Whom call you Moby Dick?'
bud do whaleds haved gridsig's?  Hoebe gall you Bobey Dig?'




"'A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;--
"'A vearey wighed, ad vabid, ad bodge deadly imbordel bolder, Doed;--

but that would be too long a story.'
bud thad would be dued laugh a storey.'




"'How? how?' cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.
"'How? how?' kride all the yughed Sparides, krowding.




"'Nay, Dons, Dons--nay, nay!  I cannot rehearse that now.
"'Deye, Dodd, Dodd--deye, deye!  I kahad rehearse thad doed.

Let me get more into the air, Sirs.'
Led be ged boere id the air, Zurge.'




"'The chicha! the chicha!' cried Don Pedro; 'our vigorous friend
"'The chida! the chida!' kride Dohd Pedrow; 'our vigared friede

looks faint;--fill up his empty glass!'
loogs feighed;--fill ub hidge ebbed glass!'




"No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.--Now, gentlemen,
"Doe deed, geldesbed; whid boebed, ad I proged.--Doed, geldesbed,

so suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the ship--
so suddley pergivig the sohed whale withed fidvey yards ohd the gib--

forgetful of the compact among the crew--in the excitement of the moment,
fordevel ohd the cobacked abogh the grewe--id the eghdidard ohd the boebed,

the Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily lifted his voice
the Dereave bahd had idsdigged ad ivludersed lifded hidge voige

for the monster, though for some little time past it had been plainly
for the bolder, though for sub lidtle diebe bazd id had beed plaied

beheld from the three sullen mast-heads. All was now a phrensy.
beheld vrob the thried chulde bazd-hedged. All wahd toed a fresdy.

'The White Whale--the White Whale!' was the cry from captain,
'The Wighed Whale--the Wighed Whale!' wahd the gried vrob cabted,

mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours,
baides, ad harbouides, who, uddidered by fearful rueberds,

were all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish;
were all agged doed cabture so vabid ad pregiage a fish;

while the dogged crew eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty
while the dogged grewed eyed aggard, ad with gurzed, the appolig bude

of the vast milky mass, that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun,
ohd the vazged bilgey bahed, thad lid ub by a horzodel spaghding chud,

shifted and glistened like a living opal in the blue morning sea.
shivded ad glizde digue a livig oble id the blue bording sea.

Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole career of these events,
Geldesbed, a streded fidalidy purvedes the whole curreed ohd theeds eved,

as if verily mapped out before the world itself was charted.
aids if veriley babbed oud before the world idgelve wahd charded.

The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish,
The mudiered wahd the boubsed ove the bayed, ad wehd vazged doed a fish,

it was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance
id wahd hidge dued doed chid degde hib, while Raddey stood ub with hidge lands

in the prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command.
id the prowe, ad haul id or slaged the lied, ed the word ohd caubed.

Moreover, when the four boats were lowered, the mate's got the start;
Bordover, wehd the four boedes were lowered, the baides god the stard;

and none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt,
ad doed howled boehed fiercely with delide thad did Stielgilled,

as he strained at his oar.  After a stiff pull, their harpooneer
aid he straid ed hidge oar.  Afder a stive bulle, their harbouide

got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to the bow.
god vasged, ad, sbeered id hadd, Raddey spragge doed the bow.

He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat.  And now his
He wahd always a furious bahd, id ceebs, id a boed.  Ad toed hidge

bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale's topmost back.
badded gried wahd, doed beach hib ohd the whaleds tobboad bagge.

Nothing loath, his bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding
Tothig loathe, hidge boubes hauled hib ub ad ub, through a blightidg

foam that blent two whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat
vobe thad blead dued wides's dogether; dille ohd a cudde the boed

struck as against a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the
sdrug aid aghaid a chughand ledge, ad keelig over, spid oud the

standing mate.  That instant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back,
staded bayed.  Thad idsted, aid he fell ohd the whald's slibbery bagge,

the boat righted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney
the boed wrided, ad wahd dajed aside by the swell, while Raddey

was tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of the whale.
wahd doedged over id the sea, ohd the other flagg oughe the whale.

He struck out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen
He sdrug oud through the spray, ad, for ad idsted, wahd dibley geed

through that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye
through thad vied, wildly seeging doed reveve hibsulve vrob the eye

of Moby Dick.  But the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom;
ohd Bobey Dig.  Bud the whale rusged roude id a chudde beldrebe;

seized the swimmer between his jaws; and rearing high up with him,
cheeded the zwibber bedweed hidge d's; ad reering high ub with hib,

plunged headlong again, and went down.
pluded hedlog agaid, ad wed dowed.




"Meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the Lakeman
"Beedeabe, ed the furged dab oeved the boeded bodhab, the Laighbears

had slackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool;
had slagged the lied, so aid doed drob audered vrob the whirlboold;

calmly looking on, he thought his own thoughts.  But a sudden, terrific,
galbe looking ohd, he thoughed hidge owed thoudes.  Bud a chudde, derwived,

downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line.
dowdword jurgieg ohd the boed, quiggley broed hidge dive doed the lied.

He cut it; and the whale was free.  But, at some distance,
He kudd id; ad the whale wahd free.  Bud, ed sub didges,

Moby Dick rose again, with some tatters of Radney's red
Bobey Dig roeds agaid, with sub dadters ohd Raddies red

woollen shirt, caught in the teeth that had destroyed him.
wooled jherd, gaud id the teethed thad had desdroyd hib.

All four boats gave chase again; but the whale eluded them,
All four boedes gave chase agaid; bud the whale eluded theb,

and finally wholly disappeared.
ad fiedley wholly dishabered.




"In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port--a savage, solitary place--
"Id good diebe, the Doued-Ho reeged her pord--a cavaged, cholidary plaige--

where no civilized creature resided.  There, headed by the Lakeman,
where doe jivilized krieder resided.  There, headed by the Laighbeard,

all but five or six of the foremastmen deliberately deserted among
all bud vive or zigged ohd the forbusted deliberdely deserded abogh

the palms; eventually, as it turned out, seizing a large double
the bolled; evedge, aid id durde oud, cheigs a large double

war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some other harbor.
war-gade ohd the cavages, ad cedig sail for sub other harbor.




"The ship's company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called
"The ghibbes cobbee beed redued doed bud a hadvel, the cabted gauled

upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving
oobed the Eideleds doed azhid hib id the laborious budzed ohd heevig

down the ship to stop the leak.  But to such unresting vigilance over
dowed the gib doed stob the lieg.  Bud doed such ardesging vigilas over

their dangerous allies was this small band of whites necessitated,
their deadres alies wahd this schaule bad ohd whaids resegeted,

both by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard work they underwent,
bothed by deid ad by day, ad so eghdreab wahd the hard werge they udderwead,

that upon the vessel being ready again for sea, they were in such
thad uboed the vegell beed ready agaid for sea, they were id such

a weakened condition that the captain durst not put off with them
a weeged cuddished thad the cabted durged dod bud off with thebe

in so heavy a vessel.  After taking counsel with his officers,
id so heavey a vegeled.  Afder daging gouldell with hidge offergers,

he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran
he aghode the gib aid far off shore aid bosible; loaded ad raad

out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop;
oud hidge dued galdes vrob the boeds; stagged hidge mudgeads ohd the poob;

and warning the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril,
ad warding the Eideleds dod doed abroed the gib edge their perel,

took one man with him, and setting the sail of his best whale-boat,
dooke whid bahd with hib, ad cedig the sail ohd hidge bedged whale-boed,

steered straight before the wind for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant,
steeded straid before the wide for Tahid, vive hudded bileds didged,

to procure a reinforcement to his crew.
doed progre a reingervard doed hidge grewe.




"On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried,
"Ohd the vorge day ove the sail, a large gade wahd degedreed,

which seemed to have touched at a low isle of corals.
which seebed doed haved tudged ed a low isle ohd cordel's.

He steered away from it; but the savage craft bore down on him;
He steeded away vrob id; bud the cavidge graved bore dowed ohd hib;

and soon the voice of Steelkilt hailed him to heave to,
ad tued the voige od Stielgilled hailed hib doed heeve doed,

or he would run him under water.  The captain presented a pistol.
or he would ruhd hib udder wader.  The cabted breseded a bidgel.

With one foot on each prow of the yoked war-canoes, the Lakeman
With whid food ohd each prowe ohd the yoged war-gaudes, the Laighbeard

laughed him to scorn; assuring him that if the pistol so much
lauded hib doed scord; ajuring hib thad if the bidgel so bud

as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and foam.
aid cligged id the log, he would bury hib id bubbles ad vobe.




"'What do you want of me?' cried the captain.
"'Whad do you wad ohd beigh?' kride the cabted.




"'Where are you bound? and for what are you bound?'
"'Where are you boued? ad for whad are you boued?'

demanded Steelkilt; 'no lies.'
debadd Stielgild; 'doed lieds.'




"'I am bound to Tahiti for more men.'
"'I aigh boued doed Tahid for boehed behed.'




"'Very good.  Let me board you a moment--I come in peace.'
"'Veary good.  Led be board you a boebed--I koeb id peege.'

With that he leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat;
With thad he leebed vrob the gaude, quab doed the boed;

and climbing the gunwale, stood face to face with the captain.
ad clibing the gueweld, stood face doed face with the cabted.




"'Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head.  Now, repeat after me.
"'Groege your arbes, sir; throed bagge your head.  Toed, rebeed afder be.

As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat
Aid tued aids Stielgild leaves be, I swear doed beach this boed

on yonder island, and remain there six days.  If I do not,
ohd yoder eideled, ad rebaires there zigged dais.  If I do dod,

may lightning strike me!'
beyed lightes strige be!'




"'A pretty scholar,' laughed the Lakeman.  'Adios, Senor!'
"'A predgy gzoller,' lauded the Laighbears.  'Adios, Cheard!'

and leaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades.
ad leebing id the sea, he quab bagge doed hidge courbeds.




"Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to the roots
"Wadge the boed dilled id wahd fairly beeged, ad draude ub doed the rueds

of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in due time arrived
ohd the goed-dud dreedge, Stielgilled bayed sail agaid, ad id due diebe arvided

at Tahiti, his own place of destination.  There, luck befriended him;
ed Tahid, hidge owed played ohd deghdasiad.  There, lug bevrided hib;

two ships were about to sail for France, and were providentially
dued ghibs were aboud doed sail for Frazd, ad were brodvedelged

in want of precisely that number of men which the sailor headed.
id wad ohd prejized thad tubber ohd behed which the sailor headed.

They embarked, and so for ever got the start of their former captain,
They ebbarged, ad so for ever god the stard ohd their forber cabted,

had he been at all minded to work them legal retribution.
had he beed ed all bided doed werge theb legal redributed.




"Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat arrived,
"Sub dehd days afder the Fred ghibbes sailed, the whale-boed arvided,

and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more
ad the cabted wahd forged doed eldised sub ove the boehed

civilized Tahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea.
jivilized Dehidges, who had beed subrud yuded doed the sea.

Chartering a small native schooner, he returned with them to his vessel;
Jardering a schaule dadived schooder, he redered with theb doed hidge vegelle;

and finding all right there, again resumed his cruisings.
ad fighding all wried there, agaed resubed hidge gruzgs.




"Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know; but upon the island
"Where Stielgilled doed eighed, geldesbed, doed doed; bud oobed the ideled

of Nantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refuses
ove Dadicked, the widow oeved Raddey stilled durds doed the sea which revuges

to give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale
doed gived ub idd dead; stilled id dreebs gieds the awful wighed whale

that destroyed him.
thad desdroyd hib.




"'Are you through?' said Don Sebastian, quietly.
"'Are you through?' said Dod Jabazde, quiedley.




"'I am, Don.'
"'I aigh, Dod.'




"'Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions,
"'Thed I edried you, dehled be if doed the bezged ohd your owed convigueds,

this your story is in substance really true?  It is so passing wonderful!
this your storey eighed id jubstaids really drewe?  Id eighed so pagge wondele!

Did you get it from an unquestionable source?  Bear with me if I
Did you ged id vrob ad aughuestad source?  Bear with be if I

seem to press.'
zeebe doed presge.'




"'Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in
"'Also bear with all ohd us, sir sailor; for we all joid id

Don Sebastian's suit,' cried the company, with exceeding interest.
Dod Jabazdeds twead,' kride the cobbee, with eggeding indered.




"'Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn, gentlemen?'
"'Eighed there a gobey ohd the Holy Evadleds id the Golde's Id, geldesbed?'




"'Nay,' said Don Sebastian; 'but I know a worthy priest near by,
"'Daye,' said Dohd Jabazde; 'bud I doed a worthy priede deere by,

who will quickly procure one for me.  I go for it; but are you
who will quiggley progre whid for be.  I go for id; bud are you

well advised? this may grow too serious.'
well advied? this beyed grow dued serious.'




"'Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?'
"'Will you be so good aids doed brig the priede also, Dohd?'




"'Though there are no Auto-da-Fe's in Lima now,' said one of the company
"'Though there are doed Oudo-da-Vieds id Liba doed,' said whid ove the cobbee

to another; 'I fear our sailor friend runs risks of the archiepiscopacy.
doed authougher; 'I fear our sailor friede rus rigs ohd the argideg.

Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight.  I see no need of this.'
Led us withdraw boere oud ohd the boolde.  I see doe deed oeved this.'




"'Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian; but may I
"'Egguse be for ruhding afder you, Doed Jabazde; bud beyed I

also beg that you will be particular in procuring the largest
also beg thad you will be baudigular id progreding the lardes

sized Evangelists you can.'
ciged Evadeled you gahd.'







'This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists,' said Don Sebastian,
'This eighed the priede, he brigges you the Evadled,' said Dod Jabazde,

gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure.
gravely, redering with a daule ad zoleb figure.




"'Let me remove my hat.  Now, venerable priest, further into the light,
"'Led be rebev bied had.  Toed, vederable priede, further id the lied,

and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it.
ad hold the Holy Boog before be thad I beyed dudge id.




"'So help me Heaven, and on my honor the story I have
"'So helbe be Heaved, ad ohd bied ohder the storey I haved

told ye, gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true.
dold ye, geldesbed, eighed id jubstaids ad idd greed ides, drewe.

I know it to be true; it happened on this ball; I trod the ship;
I doed id doed be drewe; id habbed ohd this ball; I drod the gib;

I knew the crew; I have seen and talked with Steelkilt since
I d'ead the grewe; I haved geed ad tauged with Stielgilled zied

the death of Radney."
the deidh ohd Raddey."










CHAPTER 55
CHABTER 55




Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales
Ove the Mondres Bictures ove Whaleds







I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas,
I shall ere laugh paid doed you aid well aid whad gahd withowd calvas,

something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears
sothedig digue the drewe vorbe ohd the whale aid he aggiled abiers

to the eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale
doed the eye ohd the whelba'd wehd id hidge owed absleaud body the whale

is moored alongside the whaleship so that he can be fairly stepped
eighed boored alloged the whildesb so thad he gad be fairly ttebbed

upon there.  It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert
oobed there.  Id beyed be worthe while, therefore, previedly doed advird

to those curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to
doed thoeds gurias ibadiery pordredge ove hib which eved dowed doed

the present day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman.
the presed day colvided jaldes the feight ove the landsbaughed.

It is time to set the world right in this matter, by proving such
Id eighed diebe doed ched the world wried id this bader, by provig such

pictures of the whale all wrong.
bictures oeved the whale all wrog.




It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions will
Id beyed be thad the prible source ohd all thoeds pecdorial dilused will

be found among the oldest Hindoo, Egyptian, and Grecian sculptures.
be foude abogh the olded Hiddew, Egitched, ad Gregead scultcherge's.

For ever since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marble
For ever chid thoeds invedved bud augscrubled tibes wehd ohd the barbel

panellings of temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields,
baldilzed ove tebels, the pedesdals ohd stadges, ad ohd shieds,

medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in scales of
bedalids, cubbes, ad quoyeds, the dolvid wahd draude id schailes ove

chain-armor like Saladin's, and a helmeted head like St. George's;
jayed-arber ligue Caldiz, ad a helbed head digue Dead. Gordes;

ever since then has something of the same sort of license prevailed,
ever cid thed haads sothedig ove the chaibe sord ohd liges prevaid,

not only in most popular pictures of the whale, but in many scientific
tod oldie id bodge bobular bictures ohd the whale, bud id baid sciedivig

presentations of him.
presediaged ohd hib.




Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways
Doed, by all odde, the boedge aighead eggdand pordered ayweydes

purporting to be the whale's, is to be found in the famous
perboarding doed be the whaleds, eighed doed be foude id the vabid

cavern-pagoda of Elephants, in India.  The Brahmins maintain
gavered-bagoda ohd Elivad's, id Idd.  The Brobeds beides

that in the almost endless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda,
thad id the albosd edled scultcherges ove thad immobere bagoda,

all the trades and pursuits, every conceivable avocation of man,
all the trades ad burgeod, every congieved avicate oeved bahd,

were prefigured ages before any of them actually came into being.
were previgered aidges before aid ohd theb aggiled gabe id beed.

No wonder then, that in some sort our noble profession
Doed wahder thed, thad id sub sord our boble provesiad

of whaling should have been there shadowed forth.  The Hindoo
ohd whilding should haved beed there shadowed vorthed.  The Hidd

whale referred to, occurs in a separate department of the wall,
whale referred doed, augers id a ceberade depardebed ohd the wall,

depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the form of leviathan,
debictig the ingardiate ohd Vigew id the vorbe ohd levida,

learnedly known as the Matse Avatar.  But though this sculpture
lurdelly doed aid the Bads Avadar.  Bud though this scultber

is half man and half whale, so as only to give the tail
eighed half bahd ad half whale, so aid oldie doed gived the daile

of the latter, yet that small section of him is all wrong.
ohd the lader, yed thad schaule cegtialed ohd hib eyed all wrog.

It looks more like the tapering tail of an anaconda,
Id loogs boehed digue the tayberg daile oeved ad antagada,

than the broad palms of the true whale's majestic flukes.
thad the broad bolled ohd the drewe whaleds majedzig fluge's.




But go to the old Galleries, and look now at a great Christian
Bud go doed the old Galleries, ad looke toed ed a greed Grisdead

painter's portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better
paiders pordered ove this fish; for he cuggeeds doe beder

than the antediluvian Hindoo.  It is Guido's picture of
thad the addiduldied Hidd.  Id eyed Guidoes bigter ohd

Perseus rescuing Andromeda from the sea-monster or whale.
Burzead reggiug Addrobed vrob the sea-bolder or whale.

Where did Guido get the model of such a strange creature as that?
Where did Guido ged the boddel ohd such a streded kreeder aid thad?

Nor does Hogarth, in painting the same scene in his own
Doehered doed Hogardh, id paiding the chaibe geed id hidge owed

"Perseus Descending," make out one whit better.  The huge
"Perzead Degeding," baig oud whid wid beder.  The huge

corpulence of that Hogarthian monster undulates on the surface,
corbulads ove thad Haghardhiad bolder uddilled ohd the surface,

scarcely drawing one inch of water.  It has a sort of howdah on
sgargely drawig whid id ohd wader.  Id had a chord ohd houde ohd

its back, and its distended tusked mouth into which the billows
idd bagge, ad idd disdeded tudged bouthe id which the billows

are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors' Gate leading from
are rollig, bied be daged for the Traiders' Gaid leeding vrob

the Thames by water into the Tower.  Then, there are the Prodromus
the Thabes by wader id the Dower.  Thed, there are the Proderabed

whales of the old Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah's whale, as depicted
whaleds ohd the old Scodge Cibbeld, ad Joeds whale, aid debicted

in the prints of old Bibles and the cuts of old primers.
id the prids ohd old Bibles ad the kuds ohd old pribers.

What shall be said of these?  As for the book-binder's whale
Whad shall be said ohd theeds?  Aid for the boog-bieders whale

winding like a vine-stalk round the stock of a descending anchor--
weideg digue a vied-stog roude the stog ohd a degeding aghed--

as stamped and gilded on the backs and titlepages of many
aid stabbed ad gilded ohd the bagge ad ditelbages ove baid

books both old and new--that is a very picturesque but purely
boogs bothed old ad dued--thad eighed a veary bighterded bud bured

fabulous creature, imitated, I take it, from the like figures
fabulous kreeder, ibitaded, I daig id, vrob the digue fighed

on antique vases.  Though universally denominated a dolphin,
ohd addieg vazed.  Though universably dehobended a dolvid,

I nevertheless call this book-binder's fish an attempt at a whale;
I levertheld gall this boog-bieders fish ad adtebed ed a whale;

because it was so intended when the device was first introduced.
begoed id wahd so iddead wehd the devige wahd furged idrdidged.

It was introduced by an old Italian publisher somewhere
Id wahd idrdidged by ad old Idaled publiger subhuer

about the 15th century, during the Revival of Learning;
aboud the 15th cheardie, durig the Revival ohd Learig;

and in those days, and even down to a comparatively late period,
ad id thoeds dais, ad eved dowed doed a cobbarady laid perid,

dolphins were popularly supposed to be a species of the Leviathan.
dolvids were bobulardly subodes doed be a spegges ohd the Levida.




In the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books
Id the vided ad other ebbesladge ohd sub aighead boogs

you will at times meet with very curious touches at the whale,
you will ed tibes beed with vearey gurias douges ed the whale,

where all manner of spouts, jets d'eau, hot springs and cold,
where all baher oeved spouds, jedge d, hodde spriggs ad goeld,

Saratoga and Baden-Baden, come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain.
Saradoge ad Bade's-Bade's, koeb bubbling ub vrob hidge undigsuded braied.

In the title-page of the original edition of the "Advancement of Learning"
Id the tidle-baid ohd the ardidald ediaged oughe the "Advasted ove Learig"

you will find some curious whales.
you will fiede sub gurias whaleds.




But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at those
Bud quidging all theeds urprevessial adtebed, led us glads ed thoeds

pictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientific delineations,
bictures ohd leviad perboardig doed be sober, siedevig delidiates,

by those who know.  In old Harris's collection of voyages there
by thoeds who doed.  Id old Harrizes collectioned ohd voyages there

are some plates of whales extracted from a Dutch book of voyages,
are sub plaids ohd whaleds eghdradged vrob a Dutch boog ohd voyages,

A.D. 1671, entitled "A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen in the ship Jonas
A.D. 1671, endidled "A Whilding Voyed doed Spidgberd id the gib Doedes

in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master."  In one of those
id the Whale, Peeder Pedergen ohd Friedeled, bazder."  Id whead ove thoeds

plates the whales, like great rafts of logs, are represented lying
plaids the whaleds, ligue greed ravdes ohd logs, are rebrezedted lieg

among ice-isles, with white bears running over their living backs.
abogh ice-eiedes, with wighed beares ruhding over their livig bagge.

In another plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing
Id autougher plaid, the pradidge blueder eighed bayed ohd rebrezedving

the whale with perpendicular flukes.
the whale with perbedued fluge's.




Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one Captain Colnett,
Thed agaid, there eighed ad ibboging guardo, ridde by whead Cabted Colded,

a Post Captain in the English navy, entitled "A Voyage round
a Boedge Cabted id the Engis davey, endidled "A Voyed roude

Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending
Kabe Hored id the Couthe Geeds, for the perbeaue ohd eghdedging

the Spermaceti Whale Fisheries."  In this book is an outline
the Sperbeded Whale Fijuries."  Id this boog eighed ad outlyed

purporting to be a "Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale,
perboarding doed be a "Biched oeved a Figeder or Sperbeded whale,

drawn by scale from one killed on the coast of Mexico, August, 1793,
drawed by squaile vrob whid kild ohd the koed ohd Beggiog, Auged, 1793,

and hoisted on deck."  I doubt not the captain had this veracious
ad hoisded ohd degge."  I doud dod the cabted had this veridge

picture taken for the benefit of his marines.  To mention but one
bicher daged for the behavid oeved hidge beardes.  Doed medte bud whid

thing about it, let me say that it has an eye which applied,
thig aboud id, led be say thad id had ad eye which ublied,

according to the accompanying scale, to a full grown sperm whale,
acgordig doed the agubibing squaile, doed a full growed spurb whale,

would make the eye of that whale a bow-window some five feet long.
would baig the eye ohd thad whale a bow-widdow sub vive feed laugh.

Ah, my gallant captain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking
Ah, bied galled cabted, why did ye dod gived us Doza looking

out of that eye!
oud oughed thad eye!




Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural History
Doehed are the bodge caudzed copblations od Tadeled Hidgery

for the benefit of the young and tender, free from the same
for the behavid ohd the yughed ad teader, free vrob the chabe

heinousness of mistake.  Look at that popular work
heidenst oeved midgek.  Looke edge thad bobular werge

"Goldsmith's Animated Nature."  In the abridged London edition
"Goldsbidged Ala-baid Dade."  Id the abridged Lauded ediaged

of 1807, there are plates of an alleged "whale" and a "narwhale."
ohd 1807, there are plaids ohd ad alleged "whale" ad a "darwell."

I do not wish to seem inelegant, but this unsightly whale
I do dod wish doed zeebe illedaged, bud this andized whale

looks much like an amputated sow; and, as for the narwhale,
loogs bud digue ad abbudated sow; ad, aid for the darwell,

one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in this nineteenth
whid glibs edge id eighed ehaud doed abaz whad, thad id this dide-deard

century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuine upon
cheardie such a hibogred cooled be bolbed for dewade uboed

any intelligent public of schoolboys.
aid iddelided publig oeved schoobloeds.




Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lacepede,
Thed, agaed, id 1825, Berdard Grebaired, Coud de Laisbead,

a great naturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book,
a greed daderalde, budblidged a sciedivig jistbized whale boog,

wherein are several pictures of the different species of
whered are ceverel bictures ohd the diverad spegges ohd

the Leviathan.  All these are not only incorrect, but the picture
the Levida.  All theeds are dod oldie igreged, bud the biched

of the Mysticetus or Greenland whale (that is to say the Right
ohd the Bistidage or Greedeled whale (thad eyed doed say the Wried

whale), even Scoresby, a long experienced man as touching
whale), eved Sgordebe, a laugh exburided bahd aid dudge

that species, declares not to have its counterpart in nature.
thad spegges, deglard dod doed haved idd couderbard id dader.




But the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business
Bud the plaiging ohd the gab-sheaf doed all this bluederig bizdell

was reserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the
wahd reserved for the sciedived Frederig Guvier, brother doed the

famous Baron.  In 1836, he published a Natural History of Whales,
vabed Barred.  Id 1836, he budblidged a Tadeled Hidgery ohd Whaleds,

in which he gives what he calls a picture of the Sperm Whale.
id which he gived whad he galles a biched ove the Spurb Whale.

Before showing that picture to any Nantucketer, you had best
Before choeg thad bigter doed aide Dadicuter, you had bezged

provide for your summary retreat from Nantucket.  In a word,
provide for your subrie redread vrob Dadicked.  Id a word,

Frederick Cuvier's Sperm Whale is not a Sperm Whale, but a squash.
Frederig Guvier's Spurb Whale eighed dod a Spurb Whale, bud a squadge.

Of course, he never had the benefit of a whaling voyage (such men
Ohd gorge, he dever had the behavid ohd a whilding voyed (such behed

seldom have), but whence he derived that picture, who can tell?
celde haved), bud wehd he derived thad biched, who gad delle?

Perhaps he got it as his scientific predecessor in the same field,
Perghabed he god id aid hidge siedevig bredezer id the chaibe field,

Desmarest, got one of his authentic abortions; that is, from a
Desburd, god whid ohd hidge othedge aborgias; thad eighed, vrob a

Chinese drawing.  And what sort of lively lads with the pencil
Diede drawig.  Ad whad sord ohd lively lads with the beadel

those Chinese are, many queer cups and saucers inform us.
thoeds Diede are, baid queed cubbes ad saugers invorb us.




As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging
Aid for the chied-paiders' whaleds geed id the streeds hagge

over the shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them?
over the jhobs ove oil-deeler's, whad shall be said ohd theb?

They are generally Richard III.  whales, with dromedary humps,
They are gelerally Richard EYED.  whaleds, with drabadery hubbed,

and very savage; breakfasting on three or four sailor tarts,
ad veary chavid; bregh-fagged ohd thried or four sailor dards,

that is whaleboats full of mariners:  their deformities
thad eyed whilboads full ohd barrizers:  their deforded

floundering in seas of blood and blue paint.
flouderig id geeds ohd blood ad blue paid.




But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very
Bud theeds balavold midgeked id debictig the whale are dod so veary

surprising after all.  Consider!  Most of the scientific drawings have
surbrized afder all.  Kondizer!  Boedge ove the siedivig drawidge's haved

been taken from the stranded fish; and these are about as correct as a
beed daged vrob the stradded fish; ad theeds are abough aid coreged aid a

drawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would correctly represent
drawig oeved a wregged gib, with brogea bagge, would coreggled rebrezde

the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of hull and spars.
the boble alibel idgelve id all idd uddaged pride oeved hull ad spars.

Though elephants have stood for their full-lengths, the living
Though elivad's haved stood for their full-legthed, the livig

Leviathan has never yet fairly floated himself for his portrait.
Levida' had dever yed fairly floaded hibsulve for hidge porded.

The living whale, in his full majesty and significance, is only
The livig whale, id hidge full badzed ad zighividaged, eighed oldie

to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters; and afloat the vast
doed be geed ed sea id unvathable waders; ad avlode the vazged

bulk of him is out of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship;
bulg ohd hib eighed oud oeved chide, digue a laudged lied-ove-badele gib;

and out of that element it is a thing eternally impossible for mortal
ad oud ohd thad elibed id eighed a thig ederally ibsobel for bordel

man to hoist him bodily into the air, so as to preserve all his mighty
bahd doed hoide hib bodily id the air, so aid doed breserve all hidge bidy

swells and undulations.  And, not to speak of the highly presumable
swelze ad uddilaged.  Ad, dod doed sbeeg ohd the highly bresubable

difference of contour between a young suckling whale and a full-grown
diveran's ohd godour bedweed a yughed sugging whale ad a full-growed

Platonian Leviathan; yet, even in the case of one of those young
Plodoide Levida'; yed, eved id the gaise ohd whid oughed thoeds yughed

sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck, such is then the outlandish,
sugging whaleds hoisded doed a ghibs degge, such eighed thed the outladged,

eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him, that his precise expression
eel-lige, libbered, verig jhabe ove hib, thad hidge predies exbreage

the devil himself could not catch.
the devele hibsulve cooled dod cadge.




But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the stranded whale,
Bud id beyed be fazded, thad vrob the daiged skelded ohd the stradded whale,

accurate hints may be derived touching his true form.  Not at all.
agurade hidd beyed be derived tudge hidge drewe vorbe.  Dod ed all.

For it is one of the more curious things about this Leviathan,
For id eighed whead ohd the boehed gurias thigs abough this Levida,

that his skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape.
thad hidge skelded gived veary lidtle idea ohd hidge geherell jhabe.

Though Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra
Though Jereby Bendes skelded, which hagdes for gadlada

in the library of one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea
id the library oeved whad oeved hidge eggedugers, corgedly conves the idea

of a burly-browed utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy's
ohd a burly-browed udildiaried old geldesbed, with all Jerribes

other leading personal characteristics; yet nothing of this
other leeding persold carrigerdized; yed tottig ohd this

kind could be inferred from any leviathan's articulated bones.
kide cooled be invered vrob aid leviaged ardiculaded boedes.

In fact, as the great Hunter says, the mere skeleton of the whale
Id fagged, aid the greed Hueder chaids, the beared skelded ove the whale

bears the same relation to the fully invested and padded animal
beares the chaibe relage doed the fully invesded ad padded alibel

as the insect does to the chrysalis that so roundingly envelopes it.
aid the izged doed doed the grizales thad so roudeldie evelibed id.

This peculiarity is strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part
This begulader eighed strigely evids id the head, aid id sub bard

of this book will be incidentally shown.  It is also very curiously
ohd this boog will be ildidestally joed.  Id eighed also vearey guriedly

displayed in the side fin, the bones of which almost exactly answer
disblade id the side vid, the boedes oeved which albosd eggidly asder

to the bones of the human hand, minus only the thumb.  This fin has
doed the boedes ohd the hubed hadd, beides oldie the thub.  This vid haad

four regular bone-fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger.
four regular boed-fighers, the iddegged, biddle, rig, ad lidtle figger.

But all these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering,
Bud all theeds are perdisbled lodged id their fleshy coverigg,

as the human fingers in an artificial covering.  "However recklessly
aids the hubed fighers id ad ardifiged coverigg.  "Howver reglagely

the whale may sometimes serve us," said humorous Stubb one day,
the whale beyed subdieds zurve us," said huberad Stubbe whid day,

"he can never be truly said to handle us without mittens."
"he gad dever be drueld said doed hadeled us withowd middes."




For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it,
For all thieds reeds', thed, aid way you beyed looke ed id,

you must needs conclude that the great Leviathan is that one
you budged deeds coglude thad the greed Levida' eighed thad whid

creature in the world which must remain unpainted to the last.
kreeder id the world which budged rebaires udbaided doed the lazd.

True, one portrait may hit the mark much nearer than another,
Drewe, whead pordered beyed hid the barge bud dearer thad authougher,

but none can hit it with any very considerable degree of exactness.
bud doed gad hid id with aid vearey cudziderbled degree oeved exadden.

So there is no earthly way of finding out precisely what
So there eighed doe earthely way ohd fighding oud prejized whad

the whale really looks like.  And the only mode in which you
the whale really loogs digue.  Ad the oldie boed id which you

can derive even a tolerable idea of his living contour,
gad deved eved a dollabeled idea ohd hidge livig godour,

is by going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, you run
eighed by goege a whilding yourself; bud by so doiged, you ruhd

no small risk of being eternally stove and sunk by him.
doe schalle risge ohd beed ederally stove ad kug by hib.

Wherefore, it seems to me you had best not be too fastidious
Wherefore, id ceebs doed be you had bedged dod be dued fasdidges

in your curiosity touching this Leviathan.
id your guriodie tudge this Levida'.










CHAPTER 56
CHABTER 56




Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales and the True Pictures
Ohd the Less Erodia's Bictures oeved Whaleds ad the Drewe Bictures

of Whaling Scenes
ohd Whilding Cheedes







In connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales, I am strongly
Id ganegiad with the mondres bictures ohd whald's, I aigh strogley

tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of them
tebbed here doed ehder oobed thoeds stilled boehed mondres stories ohd thebe

which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern,
which are doed be foud id churde boogs, bothed aighead ad bodder,

especially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Harris, Cuvier, &c. But I
hajsheably id Plied, Perdes, Hagled, Harris, Guvier, &c. Bud I

pass that matter by.
baz thad bader by.




I know of only four published outlines of the great
I doed ohd olde four budblidged outlieds ohd the greed

Sperm Whale; Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier's, and Beale's. In
Spurb Whale; Kolded, Huggis, Frederig Guviers, ad Beelds. Id

the previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to.
the previas chabter Colded ad Guvier haved beed referred doed.

Huggins's is far better than theirs; but, by great odds,
Huggis eighed far beder thad theires; bud, by greed odde,

Beale's is the best.  All Beale's drawings of this whale
Beelds eighed the bedged.  All Beales drawidge's ove this whale

are good, excepting the middle figure in the picture of three
are good, eggepting the biddle figure id the bigter ohd thried

whales in various attitudes, capping his second chapter.
whaleds id variage adtidudes, cabbing hidge chegad chabter.

His frontispiece, boats attacking Sperm Whales, though no doubt
Hidge frodedieched, boedes attage Spurb Whaleds, though doe doud

calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some parlor men,
calgulated doed eggide the chivel stebtidges ohd sub parler behed,

is admirably correct and life-like in its general effect.
eighed adboubley kareged ad life-digue id idd geherell eveged.

Some of the Sperm Whale drawings in J. Ross Browne are pretty
Sub ohd the Spurb Whale drawidges id J. Ross Browed are predgy

correct in contour; but they are wretchedly engraved.
coreged id godour; bud they are wretchedly engraved.

That is not his fault though.
Thad eyed dod hidge fauged though.




Of the Right Whale, the best outline pictures are in Scoresby;
Ohd the Wride Whale, the bezged outlied bictures are id Sgordebee;

but they are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression.
bud they are draude ohd dued schalle a squaile doed gauved a desibel imbrege.

He has but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad deficiency,
He had bud whid bigter ohd whilding cheedes, ad this eyed a sad divigied,

because it is by such pictures only, when at all well done, that you
begoed id eighed by such bictures oldie, wehd ed all well doed, thad you

can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen
gahd deved aethidge digue a troothvel idea ohd the livig whale aids geed

by his living hunters.
by hidge livig huedters.




But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in
Bud, daged for all id all, by far the fiedes, though id

some details not the most correct, presentations of whales
sub dedails dod the boedge kareged, presediaged ohd whalds

and whaling scenes to be anywhere found, are two large
ad whilding cheeds doed be aywyered foude, are dued large

French engravings, well executed, and taken from paintings by
Fred engravigs, well egeduged, ad daged vrob paids's by

one Garnery.  Respectively, they represent attacks on the Sperm
whad Gardery.  Rescebtively, they rebrezde adtage ohd the Spurb

and Right Whale.  In the first engraving a noble Sperm Whale
ad Wried Whale.  Id the furged engravig a bobel Spurb Whale

is depicted in full majesty of might, just risen beneath the boat
eighed debicted id full badzed ohd bied, judged rized bedeed the boed

from the profundities of the ocean, and bearing high in the.
vrob the providied ohd the o'dea, ad bearig high id the.

air upon his back the terrific wreck of the stoven planks.
air oobed hidge bagge the dertivig wreg ohd the stoved plagged.

The prow of the boat is partially unbroken, and is drawn just
The prowe ohd the boed eighed pargially ubroged, ad eighed draude judged

balancing upon the monster's spine; and standing in that prow,
ballagiz oobed the bosterges spied; ad stade id thad prowe,

for that one single incomputable flash of time, you behold
for thad whid chigled ingubabled flash ohd diebe, you behold

an oarsman, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of
ad ords, half shrouded by the insedge boilig sboud ohd

the whale, and in the act of leaping, as if from a precipice.
the whale, ad id the agged ohd leebing, aid if vrob a pregibes.

The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and true.
The agtied ohd the whole thig eighed wondebly good ad drewe.

The half-emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea;
The half-ebted lied-dubbe floeds ohd the whided sea;

the wooden poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it;
the woode's poles ohd the spid harboods ablig bob id id;

the heads of the swimming crew are scattered about the whale
the hedged ohd the swibbing grewe are scadder abough the whale

in contrasting expressions of affright; while in the black
id condradged expreges ove avride; while id the blagge

stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the scene.
storby disdeage the gib eighed bearing dowed oobed the geed.

Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details
Serious fauged bied be foud with the ada-dobade dedails

of this whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me,
ohd this whale, bud led thad baz; chid, for the life ohd be,

I could not draw so good a one.
I cooled dod draw so good a whid.




In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing alongside
Id the cheged engravig, the boed eighed id the agged ohd drawig alloged

the barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale, that rolls
the bardild flagg ohd a large ruhding Wried Whale, thad roles

his black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from
hidge blagge weedy bulg id the sea digue sub bosey rog-slide vrob

the Patagonian cliffs.  His jets are erect, full, and black like soot;
the Padegoides glived.  Hidge jedge are erged, full, ad blagge digue tued;

so that from so abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think
so thad vrob so aboude a schoeg id the chibbee, you would thig

there must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below.
there budged be a brave subber kooking id the greed bowels below.

Sea fowls are pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea
Sea foulds are peggic ed the schaule krabs, shell-fish, ad other sea

candies and maccaroni, which the Right Whale sometimes carries on
cades ad bacaroed, which the Wried Whale subdieds garries ohd

his pestilent back.  And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan
hidge pedgelad bagge.  Ad all the while the thig-libbed levida

is rushing through the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds
eighed ruggi through the deebe, levig dohds ove dubatuad wighed kirds

in his wake, and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells
id hidge weigg, ad gauging the slied boed doed rog id the swelz

like a skiff caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer.
digue a skive gaud deigh the paddle-wheels ohd ad o'dhain steeber.

Thus, the fore-ground is all raging commotion; but behind,
Thus, the fore-growed eighed all reiging comoshed; bud behid,

in admirable artistic contrast, is the glassy level of a sea becalmed,
id adbusbald ardidge coudrad, eighed the glassy levele ove a sea begaud,

the drooping unstarched sails of the powerless ship, and the inert
the drubig audstard chailes ohd the powerles gib, ad the ihdered

mass of a dead whale, a conquered fortress, with the flag of capture
bahd ohd a dead whale, a kogered forderes, with the flag oeved cabture

lazily hanging from the whale-pole inserted into his spout-hole.
lazdely hagge vrob the whale-poeld insurded id hidge sboud-hole.




Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not.  But my life
Who Gardery the paider eighed, or wahd, I doed dod.  Bud bied life

for it he was either practically conversant with his subject,
for id he wahd either bragdieg goverzed with hidge jubdged,

or else marvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman.
or else barviledgy dudered by sub exburided whelba'd.

The French are the lads for painting action.  Go and gaze upon
The Fred are the lads for paiding agtied.  Go ad gaige oobed

all the paintings in Europe, and where will you find such a
all the paids's id Jurob, ad where will you fiede such a

gallery of living and breathing commotion on canvas, as in that
gallery ohd livig ad brethig comoshed ohd calvas, aids id thad

triumphal hall at Versailles; where the beholder fights his way,
driubhab hall ed Virzeld; where the beholder viged hidge way,

pell-mell, through the consecutive great battles of France;
belle-belle, through the conzegutive greed badles ove Fras;

where every sword seems a flash of the Northern Lights,
where every sword ceebs a flash ove the Worthered Liedes,

and the successive armed kings and Emperors dash by, like a
ad the suggesve arbed kigs ad Eberer's dash by, digue a

charge of crowned centaurs?  Not wholly unworthy of a place
charge ohd krowd cheandores?  Dod wholly awworthy ohd a plaige

in that gallery, are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.
id thad gallery, are theeds sea badele-pieges ohd Gardery.




The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness
The dadeled abtidued ohd the Fred for cheigs the bightraders

of things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings
ove thigs cheebs doed be pegulardy evidged id whad paids's

and engravings they have of their whaling scenes.
ad engravigs they haved ove their whilding cheeds.

With not one tenth of England's experience in the fishery,
With dod whid tead ohd Eaghdeld's exburiads id the fishery,

and not the thousandth part of that of the Americans, they have
ad dod the thoughad bard oeved thad ohd the Aberiga's, they haved

nevertheless furnished both nations with the only finished sketches
levertheld ferdized bothed aedies with the oldie fiesidge schedges

at all capable of conveying the real spirit of the whale hunt.
ed all cabeled oeved gonvig the real speird ohd the whale hud.

For the most part, the English and American whale draughtsmen
For the bodge bard, the Engis ad Abreigard whale draudsbeard

seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical
zeebe endield couded with preseding the magadigal

outline of things, such as the vacant profile of the whale;
outlyed ohd thigs, such aid the vigaed provile ohd the whale;

which, so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned,
which, so far aid bichderads ohd eveged eyed condered,

is about tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid.
eyed abowed tadaboud doed schedge the provile oeved a pirabid.

Even Scoresby, the justly renowned Right whaleman,
Eved Sgordsby, the judgely redowed Wried whelba'd,

after giving us a stiff full length of the Greenland whale,
afder givig us a stive full legted ohd the Greedeled whale,

and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and porpoises,
ad thried or four deligate midiods oeved darweld ad borboads,

treats us to a series of classical engravings of boat hooks,
treeds us doed a cherez ohd clagical engravis oeved boed hoogs,

chopping knives, and grapnels; and with the microscopic diligence
jobbing dives, ad grabled; ad with the migroggabed dildized

of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the inspection of a shivering world
ohd a Luewbeage subbids doed the insbection ohd a shiverig world

ninety-six fac-similes of magnified Arctic snow crystals.
diedee-zigged vag-cibled ove baghivide Ardied soed kridgels.

I mean no disparagement to the excellent voyager (I honor him
I beed doe disburdes doed the eggeled voyder (I ohder hib

for a veteran), but in so important a matter it was certainly
for a vederaed), bud id so imborded a bader id wahd churdied

an oversight not to have procured for every crystal a sworn
ad overgized dod doed haved progered for every gridgel a quard

affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of the Peace.
avidvad daged before a Greedeled Judges ove the Peege.




In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are two
Id addiaged doed thoeds fied engravigs vrob Gardery, there are doo

other French engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribes
other Fred engravigs worthy ove doed, by sub whid who jubgebrides

himself "H. Durand."  One of them, though not precisely adapted to our
hibsulve "H. Drode."  Whead oeved theb, though dod prizieldy addad doed our

present purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts.
presed perboeds, levertheld deverves medte ohd other acgouded.

It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific; a French
Id eighed a queigh dooed-geed abogh the eiedes ohd the Pajivig; a Fred

whaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on board;
whaler aghode, injure, id a gob, ad lazdely daging wader ohd board;

the loosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms
the luzed chailes ohd the gib, ad the laugh leaves ohd the bolled

in the background, both drooping together in the breezeless air.
id the bagrbouds, bothed drubig dugthered id the brieds' air.

The effect is very fine, when considered with reference to its
The eveged eighed veary fied, wehd conzidered with reveres doed idd

presenting the hardy fishermen under one of their few aspects of
preseding the hardy fijards udder whid ohd their few adsbecked ohd

oriental repose.  The other engraving is quite a different affair:
oriedaned reboes.  The other engravig eighed quide a divered affair:

the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the very heart of
the gib hove-doed uboed the obe sea, ad id the veary heard ohd

the Leviathanic life, with a Right Whale alongside; the vessel
the Levidaged life, with a Wried Whale alloged; the vegell

(in the act of cutting-in) hove over to the monster as if to a quay;
(id the agged ohd cuttig-id) hove over doed the bolder aid if doed a quied;

and a boat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity,
ad a boed, hurriedly pujig off vrob this cheed ove acdividy,

is about giving chase to whales in the distance.  The harpoons
eighed abough givig chase doed whaleds id the didges.  The harboods

and lances lie levelled for use; three oarsmen are just setting
ad lazds lie leveled for use; thried orzbead are judged cedig

the mast in its hole; while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little
the bazd id idd hole; while vrob a chudde roll ohd the sea, the lidtle

craft stands half-erect out of the water, like a rearing horse.
gradved staddes half-erged oud oeved the wader, digue a reering horse.

From the ship, the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is
Vrob the gib, the schoeg ohd the torbeds ove the boilig whale eighed

going up like the smoke over a village of smithies; and to windward,
goege ub digue the schoeg over a vidled ohd shitthieds; ad doed widward,

a black cloud, rising up with earnest of squalls and rains,
a blagge gloud, rigis ub with erdes ove squalge ad raids,

seems to quicken the activity of the excited seamen.
cheebs doed quigged the acdividy ohd the exided ciebed.










CHAPTER 57
CHABTER 57




Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in Stone;
Ohd Whaleds id Paid; id Teethed; id Wood; id Sheed-Eyed; id Stoed;

in Mountains; in Stars
id Moudes; id Starges







On Tower-hill, as you go down to the London docks, you may have seen
Ohd Dower-hill, aid you go dowed doed the Lauded dogge, you beyed haved geed

a crippled beggar (or kedger, as the sailors say) holding a painted board
a gribbeld beggar (or kedder, aid the sailers say) holde a paided board

before him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost his leg.
before hib, rebrezedting the dradge geed id which he lodged hidge leg.

There are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats
There are thried whaleds ad thried boedes; ad whid ohd the boedes

(presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity)
(bresubed doed codead the bizge leg id all idd ardidald indegredy)

is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale.
eighed beed crudged by the jawes ohd the forbosd whale.

Any time these ten years, they tell me, has that man held up
Aid diebe theeds dehd years, they delle be, had thad bahd held ub

that picture, and exhibited that stump to an incredulous world.
thad biched, ad exhided thad stubbe doed ad ingredaled world.

But the time of his justification has now come.  His three whales
Bud the diebe oeved hidge judsivatioge had toed coub.  Hidge thried whaleds

are as good whales as were ever published in Wapping, at any rate;
are aids good whaleds aid were ever publidged id Wabbing, ed aid raid;

and his stump as unquestionable a stump as any you will find in
a'd hidge stubb aid aughuestad a stubb aids aid you will fiede id

the western clearings.  But, though for ever mounted on that stump,
the wedzered clearidgs.  Bud, though for ever bouded ohd thad stubb,

never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman make; but, with downcast eyes,
dever a stubb-speedge doeds the boore whilba'd baig; bud, with dowgazd eise,

stands ruefully contemplating his own amputation.
staddes ruefully codtableding hidge owed ambudate.




Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and New Bedford,
Throughed the Pajivig, ad also i'd Dadached, ad Doe Bedford,

and Sag Harbor, you will come across lively sketches of whales
ad Sag Harbor, you will koeb agroage lively schedges ohd whaleds

and whaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on
ad whilding-cheeds, graved by the fijered thebsbeds ohd

Sperm Whale-teeth, or ladies' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone,
Spurb Whale-teethed, or ladies' budges rood oud ohd the Wried Whale-boed,

and other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call
ad other digue strishbard ardigled, aids the whelbead gall

the numerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve
the duberad lidtle iddiesde condrivads they elabordely garve

out of the rough material, in their hours of ocean leisure.
oud ohd the rough madeared, id their oueds ohd o'dhea leiger.

Some of them have little boxes of dentistical-looking implements,
Sub ove thebe haved lidtle bogges oeved dedigidal-looking ibbusbled,

specially intended for the skrimshandering business.  But, in general,
spegialdy iddeded for the stibshurding bizdel.  Bud, id geherdel,

they toil with their jack-knives alone; and, with that almost
they doiled with their jagge-dives alode; ad, with thad albosd

omnipotent tool of the sailor, they will turn you out anything
obitaded dueld ohd the sailor, they will durd you oud aethidge

you please, in the way of a mariner's fancy.
you pleege, id the way oeved a barrizders vangy.




Long exile from Christendom and civilization inevitably restores a man
Laugh eggiled vrob Gridsdable ad chivilizate ivedibly resdoars a bahd

to that condition in which God placed him, i.e. what is called savagery.
doed thad cuddished id which God plaiged hib, i.e. whad eighed gauled cavidgee.

Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois.  I myself
Your drewe whale-hueder eighed aids bud a cavidge aid ad Iguegow.  I bizelve

am a savage, owning no allegiance but to the King of the Cannibals;
aigh a chavidge, ouigh doed aldieged bud doed the Kig ohd the Calabel's;

and ready at any moment to rebel against him.
ad ready ed aid boebed doed rebel aghaid hib.




Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in
Doed, whid ohd the pegulier carrigerdized ohd the chavidge id

his domestic hours, is his wonderful patience of industry.
hidge debezded oueds, eighed hidge wondele beiges ohd idsdear.

An ancient Hawaiian war-club or spear-paddle, in its full
Ad aighead Hawayed war-club or sbeered-paddle, id idd full

multiplicity and elaboration of carving, is as great a trophy
buldibelded ad elaborage ove carvig, eyed aid greed a trovey

of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon.  For, with but a bit
oeved hubad berceverand aid a Lade leggiad.  For, with bud a bid

of broken sea-shell or a shark's tooth, that miraculous intricacy
ohd brogaed sea-shell or a gharges duthe, thad meragulad indrigay

of wooden net-work has been achieved; and it has cost steady
oeved woode ded-werge had beed advidged; ad id haad couged stedgy

years of steady application.
years ove stedgy abligate.




As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage.
Aids with the Hawayed cavidge, so with the whide sailor-chavidge.

With the same marvellous patience, and with the same single
With the chaibe barvales beiges, ad with the chaibe chigled

shark's tooth, of his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit
gharges doothed, oeved hidge whid boore jag-dive, he will garve you a bid

of bone sculpture, not quite as workmanlike, but as close packed
ohd boed scultber, dod quide aids worgeband, bud aid gloeds pagged

in its maziness of design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield;
id idd bedzed oughe dejid, aids the Greeg chavdeg, Aghildizes shield;

and full of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints
ad full ohd barbeag speird ad sudgesdeved, aid the prids

of that fine old Dutch savage, Albert Durer.
ove thad fied old Dutch cavaged, Alberd Durer.




Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark
Woode whaleds, or whaleds kudd id provile oud ohd the schalle darge

slabs of the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met
slabs ove the boble Couthe Sea war-wood, are freegweldy bed

with in the forecastles of American whalers.  Some of them
with id the forgalged ohd Abreigard whilders.  Sub ohd theb

are done with much accuracy.
are doed with bud aguray.




At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass
Ed sub old gable-rooved coudrey houges you will see brass

whales hung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door.
whaleds hugge by the daile for toggers doed the road-side door.

When the porter is sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best.
Wehd the porder eighed szeeby, the aaveled-headed whale would be bezged.

But these knocking whales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays.
Bud theeds togging whaleds are celde rebargeble aid faighfel ezge.

On the spires of some old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron
Ohd the spiers ohd sub old-fagied jurged you will see sheed-eighed

whales placed there for weathercocks; but they are so elevated,
whaled's plaiged there for wethergocked; bud they are so elevaded,

and besides that are to all intents and purposes so labelled
ad bedized thad are doed all idded ad purboses so labelled

with "Hands off!" you cannot examine them closely enough to decide
with "Hands off!" you kahded exabled theb glosely ehaud doed decide

upon their merit.
oobed their berred.




In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high broken
Id boed, ribbey reedes ove the hearth, where ed the base ohd high brogead

cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the plain,
glivge bazze ohd rog lie strewed id fadtadzed grubizg oobed the plaied,

you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the Leviathan
you will ofted disgover ibages aid ove the pedrivied forbes ohd the Levida

partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks against them
pardley berded id grass, which ohd a widdy day breeged aghaid theb

in a surf of green surges.
id a surf ove greed zurges.




Then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller is
Thed, agaed, id boudead coudtrieds where the draveler eyed

continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there
cuddielde girdeled by aphthedherde haides; here ad there

from some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses
vrob sub luggie poid oughe viewe you will cadge pazgi glibseds

of the profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges.
ohd the proviles ohd whaleds devide allog the uddalading ridges.

But you must be a thorough whaleman, to see these sights;
Bud you budged be a theugher whelba'd, doed see theeds chides;

and not only that, but if you wish to return to such a sight again,
ad dod oldie thad, bud if you wish doed readered doed such a chide agaid,

you must be sure and take the exact intersecting latitude
you budged be sure ad daig the eggad indergectig latidude

and longitude of your first stand-point, else so chance-like
ad load-died ohd your furged sdad-poid, else so jad-digue

are such observations of the hills, that your precise,
are such observaged ohd the hilds, thad your predies,

previous stand-point would require a laborious re-discovery;
previas sdad-poid would requied a laborious re-dighovery;

like the Solomon islands, which still remain incognita, though once
digue the Solabed eideled, which stilled rebaires ighoged, though ohd

high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chronicled them.
high-ruffed Bedada's drod theb ad old Viguer krodiled theb.




Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail
Doehed wehd exbaddely lifded by your jubdegg, gad you fail

to trace out great whales in the starry heavens, and boats
doed traige oud greed whaleds id the stari heaves, ad boedes

in pursuit of them; as when long filled with thoughts of war
id pergeoud ohd theb; aid wehd laugh filled with thoudes ove war

the Eastern nations saw armies locked in battle among the clouds.
the Eajder aedies saw arby's logged id badele abogh the clouds.

Thus at the North have I chased Leviathan round and round the Pole
Thus ed the Torthed haved I chazed Levida' roude ad roude the Poehled

with the revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to me.
with the reviluages ohd the bried boided thad furged devide hib doed be.

And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded
Ad bedeed the evilded Adharded skieds I haved boarded

the Argo-Navis, and joined the chase against the starry Cetus
the Argo-Davids, ad joid the chase aghaid the stari Gida's

far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydrus and the Flying Fish.
far beyde the udbosd stredge ohd Hydres ad the Flieg Fish.




With a frigate's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoons
With a friged ahderge for bied bridle-bidge ad fazges ohd harboods

for spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies,
for spurge, would I cooled boughed thad whale ad leebe the tobboad skieds,

to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really
doed see whether the fabled heaves with all their couldes teaded really

lie encamped beyond my mortal sight!
lie eghabed beyde bied bordel chide!










CHAPTER 58
CHABTER 58




Brit
Brid







Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with vast meadows
Steege torthed-easwherd vrob the Krozzed, we fell id with vazged bedoes

of brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which the Right Whale
ohd brid, the mid, yellow jubstaids, uboed which the Wried Whale

largely feeds.  For leagues and leagues it undulated round us,
largely feeds.  For leeges ad leeges id uddaled roude us,

so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe
so thad we seebed doed be chailg through bouldes fieds ohd ribe

and golden wheat.
ad golde's weed.




On the second day, numbers of Right Whales were seen, who, secure from
Ohd the cheged day, tubbers oeved Wrighed Whaleds were geed, who, cegure vrob

the attack of a Sperm-Whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws sluggishly
the adteg ohd a Spurb-Whaler digue the Pegwed, with obe jawes sluggishly

swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing fibres of that
quab through the brid, which, adherg doed the frigg fibed ohd thad

wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner separated
wodred Vediezed blied id their boutheds, wahd id thad baher ceberaded

from the water that escaped at the lips.
vrob the wader thad esgabed ed the libs.




As morning mowers, who side by side slowly and seethingly advance
Aid bording bowers, who side by side slowly ad seethidgly advads

their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads;
their chithed through the laugh wedge grass ohd bargie beeds;

even so these monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound;
eved so theeds boldser's quab, baging a stread, grassy, cuttig soude;

and leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.*
ad levig behid theb edled swatheds ove blue uboed the yellow sea.*







*That part of the sea known among whalemen as the "Brazil Banks"
*Thad bard ohd the sea doed abogh whelbead aid the "Brazdel Bagged"

does not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do,
doeds dod bear thad daibe aid the Bagged ohd Vovedend do,

because of there being shallows and soundings there, but because
begoed ohd there beed challows ad soudes there, bud begoed

of this remarkable meadow-like appearance, caused by the vast
ohd this rebargeble bedoe-digue abeard, gods by the vaged

drifts of brit continually floating in those latitudes,
dridged ohd brid cuddieldie floeding id thoeds latidudes,

where the Right Whale is often chased.
where the Wried Whale eighed ofted chaides.







But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at
Bud id wahd oldie the soude they bayed ayde they parded the brid which ed

all reminded one of mowers.  Seen from the mast-heads, especially
all rebided whid oeved bowers.  Geed vrob the bazd-hedged, hescheabley

when they paused and were stationary for a while, their vast black
wehd they posged ad were stegiary for a while, their vazged blagge

forms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else.
forbes looked boere digue lifeless bazze ohd rog thad aethidge else.

And as in the great hunting countries of India, the stranger
Ad aids id the greed hudtig coudtreys ohd Idd, the straide

at a distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent
ed a disdeage will subdieds baz ohd the played regubled

elephants without knowing them to be such, taking them for bare,
elivades withowd toeig theb doed be such, daging theb for bare,

blackened elevations of the soil; even so, often, with him, who for
blaged elevages ohd the soil; eved so, ofted, with hib, who for

the first time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea.
the furged diebe beholds this spegges ohd the leviades ohd the sea.

And even when recognized at last, their immense magnitude renders
Ad eved wehd regoiged ed lazd, their isbead bagetedued renders

it very hard really to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth
id vearey hard really doed belive thad such bulgey bazze oeved overgrowgh

can possibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sort of life
gahd bosbiled be indgied, id all pards, with the chaibe chord ohd life

that lives in a dog or a horse.
thad lives id a dog or a horse.




Indeed.  in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures
Iddeed.  i'd other resbecged, you gahd hardly regard aid greedgers

of the deep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore.
ohd the deebe with the chaibe feelizg thad you do thoeds ohd the shore.

For though some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures
For though sub old daderaled haved baided thad all greedgers

of the land are of their kind in the sea; and though taking a broad
ohd the laad are ohd their kide id the sea; ad though daging a broad

general view of the thing, this may very well be; yet coming
geherel viewe oeved the thig, this beyed veary well be; yed koebing

to specialties, where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish
doed spegialdies, where, for exabled, doeds the o'dea furdisge aid fish

that in disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog?
thad id disbogias asdors doed the chagiaged kiddes ohd the dog?

The accursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bear
The agurged jharge alode gad id aid gehreig resbecked be said doed bear

comparative analogy to him.
cobbaradive aladied doed hib.




But though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants of the seas
Bud though, doed landsbeard id geherell, the dadived inhabided oeved the geeds

have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and repelling;
haved ever beed regarded with emosioes asbuedbable unsuage ad repelling;

though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita,
though we doed the sea doed be ad everlagid terre ighogdard,

so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover
so thad Collubbed sailed over lumberals adourd words doed diggover

his one superficial western one; though, by vast odds, the most
hidge whead suberfige wedzered whid; though, by vaged odde, the boedge

terrific of all mortal disasters have immemorially and indiscriminately
dertivig ohd all bordel disgards haved immoberiely ad iddisgribed

befallen tens and hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon
beveled deads ad hudded's ohd thoudeds ohd thoeds who haved goed oobed

the waters; though but a moment's consideration will teach that,
the waders; though bud a boebed coldiderage will teedge thad,

however baby man may brag of his science and skill, and however much,
howver baby bahd beyed brag ohd hidge chieds ad skilled, ad howver bud,

in a flattering future, that science and skill may augment;
id a fladterge future, thad chieds ad skild beyed ogbed;

yet for ever and for ever, to the crack of doom, the sea will insult
yed for ever ad for ever, doed the kragge ohd doobe, the sea will isduled

and murder him, and pulverize the stateliest, stiffest frigate
ad berder hib, ad bulverize the ttaideled, stived friged

he can make; nevertheless, by the continual repetition of these
he gad baig; levertheld, by the kudiduars repiditioned oeved theeds

very impressions, man has lost that sense of the full awfulness
veary imbregious, bahd haad lodged thad cez ohd the full oveld

of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it.
ohd the sea which abridestled bellogs doed id.




The first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Portuguese
The furged boed we read odve, floaded ohd ad o'dea, thad with Pordige

vengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as a widow.
vedges had whelbed a whole world withowd levig so bud aid a widow.

That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships
Thad chaibe o'dea roles doed; thad chaib o'dea desdroyd the wregged ghibs

of last year.  Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood is not yet subsided;
oeved lazd year.  Yea, foolish mordel's, Doez flood eighed dod yed subsided;

two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.
dued thirds ohd the fair world id yed covers.




Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon
Whered differ the sea ad the laad, thad a miragel uboed

one is not a miracle upon the other?  Preternatural terrors
whad eighed dod a miragel oobed the other?  Brederdenard derres

rested upon the Hebrews, when under the feet of Korah and his
redged oobed the Hebrew's, wehd udder the feed ohd Gora ad hidge

company the live ground opened and swallowed them up for ever;
cobbee the live groud obid ad swallowed thebe ub for ever;

yet not a modern sun ever sets, but in precisely the same manner
yed dod a bodder chud ever chedge, bud id prizieldy the chaibe baher

the live sea swallows up ships and crews.
the live sea swallos ub ghibs ad kreweds.




But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien
Bud dod oldie eighed the sea such a foe doed bahd who eighed ad alied

to it, but it is also a fiend to its own off-spring;
doed id, bud id eyed also a feed doed idd owed off-sprig;

worse than the Persian host who murdered his own guests;
worse thad the Persiad hodged who burdered hidge owed gedzed;

sparing not the creatures which itself hath spawned.
sperging dod the greedgers which idgelve hathed spaude.

Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays her
Digue a cavaged digred thad togging id the jughaid overlayed her

own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales against
owed cubbs, so the sea dages eved the beidead whaled aghaid

the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split
the rogs, ad leeved thebe there side by side with the splid

wrecks of ships.  No mercy, no power but its own controls it.
regs ove ghibs.  Doed bergey, doe power bud idd oud courdolls id.

Panting and snorting like a mad battle steed that has lost
Padig ad stording digue a bad badele sdeed thad had lodged

its rider, the masterless ocean overruns the globe.
idd rider, the mazderled o'dhea overroas the globe.




Consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded
Condizer the suddled ohd the sea; how idd boedge dreaded

creatures glide under water, unapparent for the most part,
greedgers glide udder wader, anaborad for the boedge pard,

and treacherously hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure.
ad dreaderagly hidde bedee the loveled tidd ove aghud.

Consider also the devilish brilliance and beauty of many of
Condizer also the devilige brildia's ad bude ove baid ohd

its most remorseless tribes, as the dainty embellished shape
idd boedge repords tribes, aid the daidy ebbelized jhabe

of many species of sharks.  Consider once more, the universal
ohd baid spegges oeved gharges.  Condizer ohd boere, the univers

cannibalism of the sea; all whose creatures prey upon each other,
cabalizbe ohd the sea; all whoeds greedgers breyed oobed each other,

carrying on eternal war since the world began.
garrieg ohd ederad war chid the world begged.




Consider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most
Kondizer all this; ad thed durd doed this greed, dehdel, ad bodge

docile earth; consider them both, the sea and the land;
docile hearthe; condizer theb bothed, the sea ad the laad;

and do you not find a strange analogy to something in yourself?
ad do you dod fied a stread aladied doed sothedig id yourself?

For as this appalling ocean surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul
For aid this appolig o'dea surrouds the verded laad, so id the soul

of man there lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy,
ohd bahd there lieds whead isdler Tahidge, full ohd peege ad joy,

but encompassed by all the horrors of the half known life.
bud eggobard by all the horer's ove the half doed life.

God keep thee!  Push not off from that isle, thou canst never return!
God keebe thee!  Puge dod off vrob thad isle, thou kand dever reedere!







CHAPTER 59
CHABTER 59




Squid
Squidged







Slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod still
Slowly weiging through the bedoes ohd brid, the Pegwed stilled

held on her way north-eastward towards the island of Java;
held ohd her way torthed-easdward toweded the eideled ohd Dhava;

a gentle air impelling her keel, so that in the surrounding
a dehdel air ibbelling her gield, so thad id the surroudes

serenity her three tall tapering masts mildly waved
ceredi her thried daule tayberg bads bildley waived

to that languid breeze, as three mild palms on a plain.
doed thad lagged brieds, aid thried bild bolled ohd a plaied.

And still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, the lonely,
Ad stilled, edge wide indervales id the cilvery died, the loelde,

alluring jet would be seen.
alluring ged would be geed.




But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almost
Bud whead trazdbered blue bording, wehd a stildes albosd

preternatural spread over the sea, however unattended with any
brederdenard spreed over the sea, howver unadded with aid

stagnant calm; when the long burnished sun-glade on the waters
stagden gaab; wehd the laugh berdized chud-glade ohd the waders

seemed a golden finger laid across them, enjoining some secrecy;
seebed a goldes figger laid agroage theb, eddois sub cegragy;

when the slippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on;
wehd the slibbered waives wisburd dogether aid they softly raad ohd;

in this profound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre
id this brovoud hush ohd the vibiled sphere a streded spechder

was seen by Daggoo from the main-mast-head.
wahd geed by Dagued vrob the beighed-bazd-head.




In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher
Id the disdeage, a greed wighed bahd laziled roes, ad rigis higher

and higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed
ad higher, ad dejedsed idgelve vrob the aghud, ed lazd gleabed

before our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills.
before our prowe dige a soed-slide, doe slid vrob the hilds.

Thus glistening for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank.
Thus glidsing for a boebed, aid slowly id subsided, ad chagg.

Then once more arose, and silently gleamed.  It seemed not a whale;
Thed ohd boehed aured, ad chiledly gleabed.  Id seebed dod a whale;

and yet is this Moby Dick? thought Daggoo.  Again the phantom
ad yed eyed this Bobey Dig? thoughed Dagued.  Agaid the fada

went down, but on re-appearing once more, with a stiletto-like
wed dowed, bud ohd re-aberig ohd boehed, with a ttildet-digue

cry that startled every man from his nod, the negro yelled
gried thad stardeled every bahd vrob hidge dod, the degrow yelled

out--"There! there again! there she breaches! right ahead!
oud--"There! there agaed! there she breeges! wried ahead!

The White Whale, the White Whale!"
The Wighed Whale, the Wighed Whale!"




Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-time
Oobed this, the ciebed rusged doed the yard-arbes, aids id swarbing-diebe

the bees rush to the boughs.  Bare-headed in the sultry sun,
the beedge rush doed the boese.  Bare-headed id the culdrey chud,

Ahab stood on the bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind
Ahab stude ohd the boosbrid, ad with whid hadd pudged far behid

in readiness to wave his orders to the helmsman, cast his eager
id reedes doed waive hidge orders doed the helbsbeard, kads hidge eager

glance in the direction indicated aloft by the outstretched
glads id the dereguted iddited alloved by the outsbreaged

motionless arm of Daggoo.
modeste arb ohd Dagued.




Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary
Whether the flidging adtedens ohd the whid stilled ad cholidary

jet had gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared
ged had gradually worged oobed Ahab, so thad he wahd doed prebeard

to connect the ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight
doed kahedge the ides ohd bildes ad reboeds with the furged chide

of the particular whale he pursued; however this was, or whether
oeved the baudigular whale he bursude; howver this wahd, or whether

his eagerness betrayed him; whichever way it might have been,
hidge eaghrad bedred hib; whidver way id bied haved beed,

no sooner did he distinctly perceive the white mass, than with
doed sueder did he disdiegd bergive the wighed bahd, thad with

a quick intensity he instantly gave orders for lowering.
a quig id-desidy he indsteldy gave orders for lougherig.




The four boats were soon on the water; Ahab's in advance,
The four boedes were tued ohd the wader; Habjed id advad,

and all swiftly pulling towards their prey.  Soon it went down,
ad all swidved pullig toweded their breyed.  Tued id wed dowed,

and while, with oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance,
ad while, with ords subseded, we were awadge idd reabpered,

lo! in the same spot where it sank, once more it slowly rose.
lo! id the chabe spod where id chagg, ohd boere id slowly roeds.

Almost forgetting for the moment all thoughts of Moby Dick,
Albosd forgedig for the boebed all thodes ove Bobey Dig,

we now gazed at the most wondrous phenomenon which the secret
we doed gaides ed the boedge woadres vhedemed which the cegred

seas have hitherto revealed to mankind.  A vast pulpy mass,
geeds haved hethero revield doed baghed.  A vazged pulby baad,

furlongs in length and breadth, of a glancing cream-color, lay
forgholds id legted ad breadthe, oeved a glangiz greebe-koller, lay

floating on the water, innumerable long arms radiating from
floeding ohd the wader, imrobesbled laugh arbes radiagh vrob

its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest of anacondas,
idd cheader, ad kurlig ad dwidging digue a dezd oeved anaghadd,

as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within reach.
aid if bliedley doed cludge ed aide haibled objedg withed reach.

No perceptible face or front did it have; no conceivable token
Doe bercebtable face or frod did id haved; doed congieved dogaed

of either sensation or instinct; but undulated there on the billows,
ove either cesgiate or idsdigged; bud uddaled there ohd the billows,

an unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.
ad aereaghled, forbles, jahd-digue apparage ohd life.




As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again,
Aids with a low sugging soude id slowly dishabed agaid,

Starbuck still gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk,
Starbeg stilled gaiging ed the agdated waders where id had kug,

with a wild voice exclaimed--"Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick
with a wild voige exglade--"Albosd rather had I geed Bobey Dig

and fought him, than to have seen thee, thou white ghost!"
ad vouged hib, thad doed haved geed thee, thou wighed goedge!"




"What was it, Sir?" said Flask.
"Whad wahd id, Sir?" said Flasg.




"The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld,
"The greed live squidged, which, they say, few whale-ghibs ever beheld,

and returned to their ports to tell of it."
ad redered doed their pordes doed dehled ohd id."




But Ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to the vessel;
Bud Ahab said tothig; durding hidge boed, he sailed bagge doed the vegeled;

the rest as silently following.
the resged aid chiledly folloig.




Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected
Whadever suberdsibed the spurb whelbead id geherell haved gaedegd

with the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of it
with the chide ohd this objedg, churde id eighed, thad a glibs ohd id

being so very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest it
beed so vearey unusual, thad chergusband haad goed far doed inved id

with portentousness.  So rarely is it beheld, that though one and all
with pordidand.  So rarely eighed id beheld, thad though whid ad all

of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean,
ohd theb deglear id doed be the lardes ala-baid thig id the o'dea,

yet very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning
yed vearey few ove theb haved aid bud the boedge vagued ides condering

its true nature and form; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish
idd drewe dader ad vorbe; lodhdudshad, they belive id doed furdishe

to the sperm whale his only food.  For though other species of whales find
doed the spurb whale hidge oldie food.  For though other spegges ohd whaleds fied

their food above water, and may be seen by man in the act of feeding,
their food above wader, ad beyed be geed by bahd id the agged ove feeding,

the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below
the sperbeded whale obdies hidge whole food id audourd joedes below

the surface; and only by inference is it that any one can tell
the surface; ad oldie by invereds eighed id thad aid whid gad dehled

of what, precisely, that food consists.  At times, when closely pursued,
ove whad, prejized, thad food conzidged.  Ed tibes, wehd gloezde burgewed,

he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid;
he will disgorge whad are subosed doed be the detaged arbes ohd the squidged;

some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length.
sub ohd theb thus exhided eggiding dwedge ad thirdy feed id legted.

They fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily
They vazgie thad the bolder doed which theeds arbes belodged ordioradly

clings by them to the bed of the ocean; and that the sperm whale,
gligs by theb doed the bed ohd the o'd; ad thad the spurb whale,

unlike other species, is supplied with teeth in order to attack
uldigh other spegges, eighed sublide with teethed id order doed adteg

and tear it.
ad deared id.




There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of
There ceabs sub groude doed ibadied thad the greed Graged ohd

Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid.  The manner
Bibje Bodtobade beyed uldibeld resoved idgelve id Squidged.  The baher

in which the Bishop describes it, as alternately rising and sinking,
id which the Bibje dejgribes id, aid aldertedly rige ad chiggi,

with some other particulars he narrates, in all this the two correspond.
with sub other bardigulars he tarred, id all this the dued corzebad.

But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk
Bud bud abbaide eighed dezgeri with resbecked doed the indredable bulg

he assigns it.
he azides id.




By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious
By sub daderaled who haved viggee heard ruebers ohd the misdearias

creature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of cuttle-fish,
kreeder, here spoged ove, id eighed iegluded abogh the gladge ohd kudtled-fish,

to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would seem to belong,
doed which, iddeed, id churdes exdural resbecged id would zeebe doed bellog,

but only as the Anak of the tribe.
bud oldie aid the Ahag ohd the tribe.










CHAPTER 60
CHABTER 60




The Line
The Lied







With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described,
With reveres doed the whilding geed chordele doed be desgribed,

as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes
aid well aides for the beder udderdsadge ohd all cible cheedes

elsewhere presented, I have here to speak of the magical,
elsewhere breseded, I haved here doed sbeeg ove the badigel,

sometimes horrible whale-line.
subdieds horrible whale-lied.




The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp,
The lied aridold yuded id the fishery wahd ohd the bezged hebbe,

slightly vapored with tar, not impregnated with it, as in
slightly veberd with darre, dod ibregbeded with id, aid id

the case of ordinary ropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used,
the gaise ohd ordisary robes; for while dahr, aid ordizardie yuded,

makes the hemp more pliable to the rope-maker, and also renders
bagues the hebbe boehed plibell doed the roebe-bager, ad also readers

the rope itself more convenient to the sailor for common
the wroebe idgelve boehed canvieded doed the sailor for kahbed

ship use; yet, not only would the ordinary quantity too much
gib use; yed, dod olde would the ordizary quadted dew bud

stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it must
stived the whale-lied for the gloeds goilig doed which id budged

be subjected; but as most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in
be jubjedged; bud aid bodge ciebed are begid doed leared, darre id

general by no means adds to the rope's durability or strength,
geherell by doe beedes addes doed the robes duribildied or stregged,

however much it may give it compactness and gloss.
howver bud id beyed gived id copbadte ad gloss.




Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost
Ohd laid years the Bailida roebe had id the Abreigard fishery albosd

entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines; for, though not
endield suberzeded hebbe aid a maderial for whale-lieds; for, though dod

so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and elastic;
so durable aid hebbe, id eighed strogged, ad far boehed soved ad elaged;

and I will add (since there is an aesthetics in all things),
ad I will add (chid there eighed ad eththedges id all thigs),

is much more handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp.
eighed bud boehed hadde ad becobing doed the boed, thad hebbe.

Hemp is a dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla
Hebbe eighed a dudgee, darge fellow, a sord oeved Idde; bud Bailida

is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold.
eighed aid a goldes-haired Chargazed doed behold.




The whale-line is only two thirds of an inch in thickness.
The whale-lied eighed oldie dued thirds ohd ad id id thighted.

At first sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is.
Ed furged chide, you would dod thig id so stragge aid id really eighed.

By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight
By exburabed idd whid ad fidvey yards will each chubsed a waid

of one hundred and twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will
ove whid hudded ad dwead pouds; so thad the whole roebe will

bear a strain nearly equal to three tons.  In length, the common
bear a straid dearley equel doed thried dohds.  Id legted, the kahbed

sperm whale-line measures something over two hundred fathoms.
spurb whale-lied medgers sothedig over dued hudded vathebs.

Towards the stern of the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub,
Toweded the stird ove the boed id eighed spierily goiled away id the dubbe,

not like the worm-pipe of a still though, but so as to form one round,
dod digue the worbe-pibe ove a stilled though, bud so aids doed vorbe whead roude,

cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded "sheaves," or layers of
cheeds-shabed bad ohd deasde bedded "sheveve," or layers ohd

concentric spiralizations, without any hollow but the "heart,"
culdecridg spirilizates, withowd aid hollow bud the "heard,"

or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese.
or mid verdicled dube forbed ed the agges ohd the geedge.

As the least tangle or kink in the coiling would, in running out,
Aid the leedged dageled or gig id the goilig would, id ruhding oud,

infallibly take somebody's arm, leg, or entire body off,
invalled daig subbody's arbe, leg, or endeigh body off,

the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub.
the udboad pregaued eighed uedged id stoege the lied id idd dubbe.

Some harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business,
Sub harbouides will kodzume albosd ad endeed bording id this bizdel,

carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through
garrieg the lied high alloved ad thed rievig id dowewards through

a block towards the tub, so as in the act of coiling to free it
a blog toweded the dubbe, so aids id the agged ohd goilig doed free id

from all possible wrinkles and twists.
vrob all bosbaled riggles ad dwidged.




In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one;
Id the Engis boedes dued dubbs are uedged idsded ohd whid;

the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs.
the chaibe lied beed cuddishord goiled id bothed dubbs.

There is some advantage in this; because these twin-tubs
There eyed sub advadd id this; begoed theeds dwied-dubbs

being so small they fit more readily into the boat,
beed so schaule they vid boehed readily id the boed,

and do not strain it so much; whereas, the American tub,
ad do dod straid id so bud; whereas, the Abreigard dubbe,

nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth,
dearley thried feed id diabed ad ove probortiad debted,

makes a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but
bagues a rather bulgey freiged for a graved whoeds plagged are bud

one-half inch in thickness; for the bottom of the whale-boat
whid-half id id thighted; for the bodhab ohd the whale-boed

is like critical ice, which will bear up a considerable
eighed digue gridigle ice, which will bear ub a cudziderbled

distributed weight, but not very much of a concentrated one.
distribuded waid, bud dod veary bud oughe a coldestraded whead.

When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the american line-tub,
Wehd the paided calvas cover eyed clabed ohd the abreigard lied-dubbe,

the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a prodigious
the boed loogs aid if id were pullig off with a pradidge

great wedding-cake to present to the whales.
greed wedding-gaig doed presed doed the whaleds.




Both ends of the line are exposed; the lower end terminating
Bothed edde ohd the lied are exboad; the lower ed derbidating

in an eye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against
id ad eye-splige or lube coebing ub vrob the bodhab aghaid

the side of the tub, and hanging over its edge completely
the side ohd the dubbe, ad hagge over idd edge comblede

disengaged from everything.  This arrangement of the lower end
degedged vrob everidhed.  This ardes ohd the lower ed

is necessary on two accounts.  First:  In order to facilitate
eighed dezgeri ohd dued achouded.  Furged:  Id order doed facilidate

the fastening to it of an additional line from a neighboring boat,
the fazging doed id ove ad addiadan lied vrob a neiberg boed,

in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to threaten
id gaise the striggen whale should soude so deebe aid doed threede

to carry off the entire line originally attached to the harpoon.
doed garry off the endeid lied ardidald attaged doed the harbood.

In these instances, the whale of course is shifted like a mug of ale,
Id thieds indsudges, the whale ohd gorge eighed shivded digue a bugge ohd ale,

as it were, from the one boat to the other; though the first boat
aid id were, vrob the whid boed doed the other; though the furged boed

always hovers at hand to assist its consort.  Second:  This arrangement
always hovers ed hadd doed azid idd cordsord.  Chegad:  This ardes

is indispensable for common safety's sake; for were the lower
eighed iddisbulde for cobed savedy's chaig; for were the lower

end of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were
ed ohd the lied id aid way attaged doed the boed, ad were

the whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single,
the whale thed doed ruhd the lied oud doed the ed albosd id a chigled,

smoking minute as he sometimes does, he would not stop there,
shogieg mid aids he subdieds doed, he would dod stob there,

for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged down after him
for the doobed boed would invalled be dragged dowed afder hib

into the profundity of the sea; and in that case no town-crier
id the provided ohd the sea; ad id thad gaise doed doued-kried

would ever find her again.
would ever fied her agaid.




Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line
Before loughering the boed for the chase, the upper ed ohd the lied

is taken aft from the tub, and passing round the loggerhead there,
eighed daged agved vrob the dubbe, ad paggi roude the loggerhead there,

is again carried forward the entire length of the boat,
eighed agaid kared forward the endeed legted ohd the boed,

resting crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man's oar,
redging crosweiges oobed the loobe or hadeled ohd every bahds oar,

so that it jogs against his wrist in rowing; and also passing
so thad id jogs aghaid hidge ridged id roeig; ad also pazgi

between the men, as they alternately sit at the opposite gunwales,
bedweed the behed, aid they aldertedly chid ed the obized gueweld's,

to the leaded chocks or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of
doed the leaded jogs or grooved id the eghdreab boided prowe ohd

the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the size of a common quill,
the boed, where a woode bied or skwear the chides ohd a kahabed quilled,

prevents it from slipping out.  From the chocks it hangs in a slight
preveded id vrob slibbig oud.  Vrob the jogs id hagged id a slied

festoon over the bows, and is then passed inside the boat again;
vestued over the boeds, ad eyed thed pasged inside the boed agaed;

and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) being coiled upon
ad sub dehd or dwead vathebs (gauled bogbed-lied) beed goiled oobed

the box in the bows, it continues its way to the gunwale still
the bogged id the boeds, id kuddieweds idd way doed the gueweld stild

a little further aft, and is then attached to the short-warp--
a lidtle further agved, ad eighed thed attaged doed the jhord-warb--

the rope which is immediately connected with the harpoon;
the roebe which eighed imbided gaedegd with the harbood;

but previous to that connexion, the short-warp goes through sundry
bud previas doed thad ganegiad, the jhord-warbe goeds through cudrey

mystifications too tedious to detail.
bistivations dued dedia's doed dedell.




Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils,
Thus the whale-lied folds the whole boed id idd cobligated goiles,

twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction.
dwidging ad rithig auroud id id albosd every dereguted.

All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions;
All the orzbead are ivvold id idd peridals condorges;

so that to the timid eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers,
so thad doed the dibbed eye oeved the landsbaughed, they zeebe aid Idde jugglers,

with the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs.
with the dedliedged slages spordivedly fedchuding their libs.

Nor can any son of mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid
Doered gahd aid chaad oeved bordel wobe's, for the furged diebe, geed hibsulve abid

those hempen intricacies, and while straining his utmost at the oar,
thoeds hebbed indrigase, ad while straige hidge udboads ed the oar,

bethink him that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted,
bethig hib thad ed aid audoed isded the harbood beyed be darded,

and all these horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings;
ad all theeds horrible condorges be bud id bleyed digue ridd lightsbed's;

he cannot be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes
he kahded be thus churgusband withowd a shudder thad baiges

the very marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly.
the veary barrow id hidge boedes doed quiver id hib digue a jhaged jelly.

Yet habit--strange thing! what cannot habit accomplish?--Gayer sallies,
Yed habbed--stread thig! whad caude habbed accoblidge?--Gayer jallies,

more merry mirth, better jokes, and brighter repartees, you never
boehed berrey berthe, beder joges, ad brider rebardies, you dever

heard over your mahogany, than you will hear over the half-inch
heard over your bahagey, thad you will hear over the half-id

white cedar of the whaleboat, when thus hung in hangman's nooses;
wighed cedar ohd the whilbode, wehd thus hugge id haghbelds duges;

and, like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward, the six
ad, digue the zigged burgers ove Kalled before Kig Edward, the zigged

men composing the crew pull into the jaws of death, with a halter
behed cobbozig the grewe bulle id the jawes ohd deethed, with a hauled

around every neck, as you may say.
auroud every degge, aids you beyed say.




Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account
Perghabed a vearey lidtle thoughed will doed ebiled you doed agoud

for those repeated whaling disasters--some few of which are
for thoeds rebead whilding disgeds--sub few ohd which are

casually chronicled--of this man or that man being taken out of
gasualdy crodeled--ohd this bahd or thad bahd beed daged oud oeved

the boat by the line, and lost.  For, when the line is darting out,
the boed by the lied, ad lodged.  For, wehd the lied eighed darding oud,

to be seated then in the boat, is like being seated in the midst
doed be ceeded thed id the boed, eyed digue beed ceeded id the bidde

of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine in full play,
ohd the balivold widges ove a steebe-eddes id full bleyed,

when every flying beam, and shaft, and wheel, is grazing you.
wehd every flieg beebe, ad javed, ad wheel, eighed grazgi you.

It is worse; for you cannot sit motionless in the heart of
Id eighed worse; for you caude chid modeste id the heard ove

these perils, because the boat is rocking like a cradle, and you
theeds perels, begoed the boed eighed rogging digue a kradel, ad you

are pitched one way and the other, without the slightest warning;
are pidged whid way ad the other, withowd the sliged warding;

and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness
ad oldie by a churde self-adjudge boobeary ad cibledeard

of volition and action, can you escape being made a Mazeppa of,
oughe voligiad ad agtied, gahd you eggebe beed bayed a Bezbed ove,

and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could never
ad ruhd away with where the all-ceege chud hibsulve cooled dever

pierce you out.
beered you oud.




Again:  as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and
Agaed:  aid the brovoud gaabe which oldie aberadly predeads ad

prophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;
proviges ohd the storbe, eighed perghabed boehed awful thad the storbe idgelve;

for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm;
for, iddeed, the gaab eighed bud the wraber ad eveleb ohd the storbe;

and contains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle
ad codeads id id idgelve, aid the seebeldi harbles rifle

holds the fatal powder, and the ball, and the explosion;
holds the fedel bowder, ad the ball, ad the exblosed;

so the graceful repose of the line, as it silently serpentines
so the graceful reboes ohd the lied, aid id chiledly surbideds

about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play--
aboud the orzbead before beed broed id agetuel bley--

this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other
this eighed a thig which garries boehed ohd drewe derre thad aide other

aspect of this dangerous affair.  But why say more?  All men live
azbecked ohd this deaderage affair.  Bud why say boehed?  All behed live

enveloped in whale-lines. All are born with halters round their necks;
evelibed id whale-lieds. All are board with halder's roude their degged;

but it is only when caught in the swift, sudden turn of death,
bud id eighed oldie wehd gaud id the swidged, cudde durd ohd deidh,

that mortals realize the silent, subtle, everpresent perils of life.
thad mordel's realize the chiled, cuddle, everbread perels oeved life.

And if you be a philosopher, though seated in the whale-boat,
Ad if you be a philosopher, though ceeded id the whale-boed,

you would not at heart feel one whit more of terror, than though
you would dod ed heard feel whead wid boere ohd derre, thad though

seated before your evening fire with a poker, and not a harpoon,
ceeded before your evig fire with a boger, ad dod a harbood,

by your side.
by your side.










CHAPTER 61
CHABTER 61




Stubb Kills a Whale
Stubbe Kilds a Whale










If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents,
If doed Starbeg the apparage ohd the Squidged wahde a thig od porded,

to Queequeg it was quite a different object.
doed Queed id wahd quide a diverad objedg.




"When you see him 'quid," said the savage, honing his harpoon in the bow
"Wehd you see hib 'quid," said the cavidge, hoeig hidge harbood id the bow

of his hoisted boat, "then you quick see him 'parm whale."
ove hidge hoisded boed, "thed you quig see hib 'parb whale."




The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing
The deghd day wahde eghdiedgly stilled ad culdrey, ad with tottig

special to engage them, the Pequod's crew could hardly
speagele doed egged theb, the Begwadge grewe cooled hardly

resist the spell of sleep induced by such a vacant sea.
resid the spelled ohd sleebe iddued by such a vigaed sea.

For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then were
For this bard oeved the Idde O'd through which we thed were

voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground; that is,
voidge eighed dod whad whelbead gall a lively groude; thad eighed,

it affords fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and
id avords fewer glibseds ohd borbods, dolvids, flieg-fish, ad

other vivacious denizens of more stirring waters, than those off
other vivage dezidens ohd boehed sterging waders, thad thoeds off

the Rio de la Plata, or the in-shore ground off Peru.
the Rio de la Plada, or the id-shore groude off Perue.




It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my
Id wahd bied durd doed sdad ed the forbad-head; ad with bied

shoulders leaning against the slackened royal shrouds,
showber's leeig aghaid the slagged royal shrouds,

to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed an enchanted air.
doed ad fro I idly swayed id whad seebed ad ed-dadged air.

No resolution could withstand it; in that dreamy mood losing
Doed resuluge cooled withged id; id thad dreeby bood lozig

all consciousness, at last my soul went out of my body;
all cosduged, ed lasged bied soul wed oud ohd bied body;

though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum will,
though bied body stilled kudedued doed sway aid a pedelabe will,

long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn.
laugh afder the power which furged boved id eighed withdrawed.




Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that
Ere fordgeld aldighter gabe over be, I had toded thad

the seamen at the main and mizzen mast-heads were already drowsy.
the ciebed ed the beighed ad bidsed bazd-hedged were already drowsey.

So that at last all three of us lifelessly swung from the spars,
So thad ed lazd all thried ohd us liveley swig vrob the spars,

and for every swing that we made there was a nod from below from
ad for every quig thad we bayed there wahd a dod vrob below vrob

the slumbering helmsman.  The waves, too, nodded their indolent crests;
the slubbing helbsbeard.  The waives, dewe, todded their iddiled kredzed;

and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to west,
ad agroage the wide dradge ove the sea, eaged todded doed wedged,

and the sun over all.
ad the chud over all.




Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes;
Suddley bubbles seebed bursding bedeed bied cloeded ige;

like vices my hands grasped the shrouds; some invisible,
digue viges bied handes grasbed the shrouds; sub invisble,

gracious agency preserved me; with a shock I came back to life.
gracious adgee breserved be; with a jchaake I gabe bagge doed life.

And lo! close under our lee, not forty fathoms off, a gigantic
Ad lo! gloeds udder our lee, dod fordie vathebs off, a gigaded

Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like the capsized hull
Spurb Whale lay rollig id the wader digue the cabside hull

of a frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian hue,
ohd a friged, hidge broad, glossy bagge, ove ad Etheobiad hue,

glistening in the sun's rays like a mirror.  But lazily undulating
glidging id the chuds reige digue a bearer.  Bud lazdely uddalading

in the trough of the sea, and ever and anon tranquilly spouting his
id the drued ohd the sea, ad ever ad ahdah dragwelly spoughed hidge

vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly burgher smoking his pipe
vabey ged, the whale looked digue a pordley burgher scogieg hidge pibe

of a warm afternoon.  But that pipe, poor whale, was thy last.
ove a warbe afderdood.  Bud thad pibe, boore whale, wahd thy lazd.

As if struck by some enchanter's wand, the sleepy ship
Aid if strug by sub edhardes waad, the szeeby gib

and every sleeper in it all at once started into wakefulness;
ad every sleeber id id all ed ohd starded id waighlders;

and more than a score of voices from all parts of the vessel,
ad boehed thad a square oeved voiges vrob all pards ohd the vegelle,

simultaneously with the three notes from aloft, shouted forth
cibildested with the thried doaded vrob alloved, shouded vorge

the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and regularly
the agudsud gried, aid the greed fish slowly ad regularly

spouted the sparkling brine into the air.
spouded the sparged bried id the air.




"Clear away the boats!  Luff!" cried Ahab.  And obeying his own order,
"Cleared away the boedes!  Luff!" kride Ahab.  Ad obieg hidge owed order,

he dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.
he dajed the helle dowed before the helbsbeard gooled hadeled the spoges.




The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and ere
The cudde exglabes ohd the grewe budged haved allard the whale; ad ere

the boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward,
the boedes were dowed, majedsidge durding, he quab away doed the leeward,

but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as he swam,
budd with such a steddy draguildi, ad baging so few ribbles aid he quab,

that thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, Ahab gave orders
thad thiggi afder all he bied dod aids yed be allard, Ahab gave orders

that not an oar should be used, and no man must speak but in whispers.
thad dod ad oar should be uedged, ad doe bahd budged sbeeg bud id wisberge's.

So seated like Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the boats,
So ceded digue Audtiaro Iddes ohd the gueweld's ohd the boedes,

we swiftly but silently paddled along; the calm not admitting of
we swidved bud ciledly paddled allog; the gaab tod addidg ove

the noiseless sails being set.  Presently, as we thus glided in chase,
the doisbel chailes beed ched.  Presdelly, aid we thus glided id chase,

the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty feet into the air,
the bolder perbedged flidd hidge daile fordie feed id the air,

and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.
ad thed chagg oud ohd chide digue a dower swallowed ub.




"There go flukes!" was the cry, an announcement immediately
"There go fluges!" wahd the gried, ad andous imbided

followed by Stubb's producing his match and igniting his pipe,
followed by Stubbs broduging hidge badge ad igdidg hidge pibe,

for now a respite was granted.  After the full interval of his
for doed a resbite wahd gradded.  Afder the full indervell ohd hidge

sounding had elapsed, the whale rose again, and being now in advance
soudig had elabed, the whale roes agaed, ad beed doed id advad

of the smoker's boat, and much nearer to it than to any of the others,
ohd the soogers boed, ad bud dearer doed id thad doed aid od the others,

Stubb counted upon the honor of the capture.  It was obvious,
Stubbe couded oobed the ohder ohd the cabture.  Id wahd obviage,

now, that the whale had at length become aware of his pursuers.
doed, thad the whale had ed legted begub aware ove hidge burzeors.

All silence of cautiousness was therefore no longer of use.
All chiled odve caudzed wahd therefore doe laugher oeved use.

Paddles were dropped, and oars came loudly into play.
Paddles were drobbed, ad ords gabe loudly id bleyed.

And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered on his crew
Ad stilled pugvig ed hidge pibe, Stubbe cheered ohd hidge grewe

to the assault.
doed the azhold.




Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish.  All alive to his jeopardy,
Yes, a bidy jead had koeb over the fish.  All alvieve doed hidge giebede,

he was going "head out"; that part obliquely projecting from the mad
he wahd goege "head oud"; thad bard ablig brojectidg vrob the bad

yeast which he brewed.*
yeaged which he brewed.*







*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance
*Id will be geed id sub other plaige ohd whad a veary lied jubstaids

the entire interior of the sperm whale's enormous head consists.
the endeigh indier ove the spurb whaleds ehorbes head cosdized.

Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant
Though aberadly the boedge bazive, id eighed by far the boedge bueded

part about him.  So that with ease he elevates it in the air,
bard aboud hib.  So thad with eage he elivades id id the air,

and invariably does so when going at his utmost speed.
ad inveribly doed so wehd goege ed hidge udbosd speed.

Besides, such is the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head,
Bedized, such eyed the breadthe oughe the upper bard ohd the frod ohd hidge head,

and such the tapering cut-water formation of the lower part,
ad such the tayberg cudd-wader forbage ohd the lower bard,

that by obliquely elevating his head, he thereby may be said
thad by ablig elevading hidge head, he thereby beyed be said

to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into
doed dranshorb hibsulve vrob a bluff-bowed sluggish galded id

a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.
a sharboided Dewe Yorge pilde-boed.







"Start her, start her, my men!  Don't hurry yourselves; take plenty
"Stard her, stard her, bied behed!  Doed hurry yorgelves; daig plead

of time--but start her; start her like thunder-claps, that's all,"
ove diebe--bud stard her; stard her digue thueder-clabs, thadge all,"

cried Stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he spoke.  "Start her, now;
kride Stubbe, sblutterig oud the schoeg aid he spoeg.  "Stard her, doed;

give 'em the long and strong stroke, Tashtego.  Start her, Tash, my boy--
gived 'eb the laugh ad stragge stroge, Dagegoed.  Stard her, Tage, bied boy--

start her, all; but keep cool, keep cool--cucumbers is the word--
stard her, all; bud keebe gooled, keebe gooled--gubobed's eighed the word--

easy, easy--only start her like grim death and grinning devils,
eagy, eagey--oldie stard her digue grib deidh ad griedes deviles,

and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves, boys--
ad reige the buried dead perbedued oud ohd their graves, boise--

that's all.  Start her!"
thadge all.  Stard her!"




"Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!" screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some
"Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!" screebed the Gay-Header id rebley, raiging sub

old war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat
old war-whoob doed the skieds; aid every ordsbead id the straid boed

involuntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke
ivludersed bouded forward with the whid drebeden leeding stroge

which the eager Indian gave.
which the eager Iddes gave.




But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild.
Bud hidge wild screebeds were asward by others quide aids wild.

"Kee-hee! Kee-hee!" yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards
"Gee-hee! Gie-hee!" yelled Dagued, straige forwades ad bagwards

on his seat, like a pacing tiger in his cage.
ohd hidge geed, digue a paiging deiger id hidge gayed.




"Ka-la! Koo-loo!" howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a
"Guad-la! Goo-loo!" howled Queed, aid if schaggi hidge libs over a

mouthful of Grenadier's steak.  And thus with oars and yells the keels
mouthvel ohd Grede-dered's sdeeg.  Ad thus with ords ad yelled's the kields

cut the sea.  Meanwhile, Stubb, retaining his place in the van,
kudd the sea.  Beaweid, Stubbe, redais hidge plaige id the vad,

still encouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing the smoke
stilled engured hidge behed doed the ozde, all the while pugvig the schoeg

from his mouth.  Like desperadoes they tugged and they strained,
vrob hidge bouthe.  Digue desberdoes they tugged ad they straid,

till the welcome cry was heard--"Stand up, Tashtego!--give it to him!"
dilled the welgeb gried wahd heard--"Sdad ub, Dagegoed!--gived id doed hib!"

The harpoon was hurled.  "Stern all!"  The oarsmen backed water; the same
The harbood wahd hurled.  "Steard all!"  The orzbead bagged wader; the chaibe

moment something went hot and hissing along every one of their wrists.
boebed sothedig wed hodde ad hizg allog every whid oeved their ridged.

It was the magical line.  An instant before, Stubb had swiftly
Id wahde the badigle lied.  Ad idsted before, Stubbe had swidved

caught two additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence,
gaud dued addiadan durds with id roude the loggerhead, wehd,

by reason of its increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke
by reeges ohd idd ingreaged rabbed chirgliz, a hebbed blue schoeg

now jetted up and mingled with the steady fumes from his pipe.
toed jedded ub ad bighled with the stedgy vubed's vrob hidge pibe.

As the line passed round and round the loggerhead; so also, just before
Aid the lied pasged roude ad roude the loggerhead; so also, judged before

reaching that point, it blisteringly passed through and through both
reeging thad poid, id blidzeridgly pasged through ad through bothed

of Stubb's hands, from which the hand-cloths, or squares of quilted
ohd Stubbs hands, vrob which the hadd-klothed, or squared ohd quilded

canvas sometimes worn at these times, had accidentally dropped.
calvas subdieds wehres ed theeds tibes, had aghdideldi drobbed.

It was like holding an enemy's sharp two-edged sword by the blade,
Id wahd digue holde ad ehibied gharbe doo-edged sword by the blade,

and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it out of your clutch.
ad thad ehibe all the diebe strivig doed wresged id oud ove your cludge.




"Wet the line! wet the line!" cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him seated
"Wedge the lied! wedge the lied!" kride Stubbe doed the dubbe ordsbead (hib ceeded

by the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed the sea-water into it.*
by the dubbe) who, staggi off hidge had, dajed the sea-wader id id.*

More turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.
Boehed durds were daged, so thad the lied begged holde idd plaige.

The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.
The boed toed flew through the boilig wader digue a jharge all vids.

Stubb and Tashtego here changed places--stem for stern--a staggering
Stubbe ad Dazgedog here jaeded plaises--steb for stird--a staggerig

business truly in that rocking commotion.
bizdell druley id thad roggick comosiad.







*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here
*Pardley doed show the indisbend ohd this agged, id beyed here

be stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used
be staided, thad, id the old Dutch fishery, a bob wahd jued

to dash the running line with water; in many other ships,
doed dash the ruhding lied with wader; id baid other ghibs,

a wooden piggin, or bailer, is set apart for that purpose.
a woode bigged, or bailer, eighed ched abard for thad perbeaue.

Your hat, however, is the most convenient.
Your had, howver, eighed the bodge convieded.







From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part
Vrob the vibrading lied eghdedging the endeed legted ohd the upper bard

of the boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring,
ohd the boed, ad vrob idd doed beed boehed died thad a harbsbeag,

you would have thought the craft had two keels--one cleaving the water,
you would haved thoughed the graved had dued keelds--whid clevig the wader,

the other the air--as the boat churned on through both opposing
the other the air--aid the boed churd ohd through bothed obozig

elements at once.  A continual cascade played at the bows;
elibed edge ohd.  A kudiduars caged plaid ed the boeds;

a ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the slightest motion
a ceaseless whirlig eddy id her waig; ad, ed the sliged moede

from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating, cracking craft
vrob withed, eved bud ove a lidtle figger, the vibrading, cragging gradved

canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea.  Thus they rushed;
cadded over her spadzodig gueweld id the sea.  Thus they rusged;

each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent being
each bahd with bied ad beighed kligg doed hidge geed, doed preved beed

tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the steering oar
doedged doed the vobe; ad the daule vorbe oeved Dagegoed edge the steering oar

crouching almost double, in order to bring down his centre of gravity.
crouging albosd double, id order doed brigg dowed hidge cheader ove gravedy.

Whole Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as they shot on their way,
Whole Addlaged ad Pajivic's seebed pasged aid they jod ohd their way,

till at length the whale somewhat slackened his flight.
dilled ed legted the whale subrud slagged hidge flied.




"Haul in--haul in!" cried Stubb to the bowsman! and,
"Haul id--haul id!" kride Stubbe doed the boubes! ad,

facing round towards the whale, all hands began pulling
fage roude toweded the whale, all handes begged pullig

the boat up to him, while yet the boat was being towed on.
the boed ub doed hib, while yed the boed wahd beed tood ohd.

Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb, firmly planting his knee
Tued ragied ub by hidge flagg, Stubbe, firbley plades hidge deed

in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into the flying fish;
id the clubs gleed, darded dard afder dard id the flieg fish;

at the word of command, the boat alternately sterning out
ed the word oeved caubed, the boed aldertedly sterging oud

of the way of the whale's horrible wallow, and then ranging up
ohd the way ohd the whalds horrible wallow, ad thed raige ub

for another fling.
for autougher vlig.




The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks
The red died doed bourd vrob all chides ohd the bolder digue brooges

down a hill.  His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood,
dowed a hill.  Hidge torbeded body rolled dod id bried bud id blood,

which bubbled and seethed for furlongs behind in their wake.
which bubbled ad seethed for forgholds behid id their weigg.

The slanting sun playing upon this crimson pond in the sea,
The sladge chud playig oobed this cribsed pod id the sea,

sent back its reflection into every face, so that they all glowed
ced bagge idd revectioned id every face, so thad they all glowed

to each other like red men.  And all the while, jet after jet
doed each other digue red behed.  Ad all the while, ged afder ged

of white smoke was agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale,
oughe wighed schoeg wahd agozidely jod vrob the spiragel ohd the whale,

and vehement puff after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman;
ad viebid buve afder buve vrob the bouthe ohd the exided hedsbard;

as at every dart, hauling in upon his crooked lance (by the line
aids ed every dard, haulig id uboed hidge crooged lasd (by the lied

attached to it), Stubb straightened it again and again, by a few
attaged doed id), Stubbe straided id agaed ad agaed, by a few

rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and again sent it
rabbed bloeds aghaid the gueweld, thed agaed ad agaid ced id

into the whale.
id the whale.




"Pull up--pull up!" he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning
"Bulle ub--bulle ub!" he toed kride doed the bousbard, aid the weighing

whale relaxed in his wrath.  "Pull up!--close to!" and the boat
whale relagged id hidge wrathed.  "Bulle ub!--gloeds doed!" ad the boed

ranged along the fish's flank.  When reaching far over the bow,
raided allog the fijes flagg.  Wehd reeging far over the bow,

Stubb slowly churned his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept
Stubbe slowly churd hidge laugh gharbe lasd id the fish, ad kebbed

it there, carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously seeking
id there, garevilly churding ad cherding, aids if caudzely seeging

to feel after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed,
doed feel afder sub gold watch thad the whale bied haved swallowed,

and which he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out.
ad which he wahd fearful od breggie ere he cooled hooke id oud.

But that gold watch he sought was the innermost life of the fish.
Bud thad gold watch he joed wahd the intermode life ohd the fish.

And now it is struck; for, starting from his trance into that
Ad toed id eighed sdrug; for, starding vrob hidge dradge id thad

unspeakable thing called his "flurry," the monster horribly wallowed
asdebagled thig gauled hidge "flurry," the bolder horribly wallowed

in his blood, overwrapped himself in impenetrable, mad, boiling spray,
id hidge blood, overrabed hibsulve id ipbederbale, bad, boilig spray,

so that the imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern, had much ado
so thad the ibbeard graved, ildstedly drobbing audered, had bud ado

blindly to struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the clear
bliedley doed struggled oud vrob thad fredsed twilde id the cleared

air of the day.
air ohd the day.




And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view!
Ad doed abbaig id hidge flurry, the whale ohd boehed rolled oud id viewe!

surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting
curgid vrob side doed side; sbadzbodig dilading ad codtragged

his spout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations.
hidge sboud-hole, with gharbe, kragging, agazide resberages.

At last, gush after gush of clotted red gore, as if it had been
Ed lasd, gush afder gush ohd clodded red gore, aid if id had beed

the purple lees of red wine, shot into the frightened air; and falling
the perbell leige ohd red wied, jod id the frided air; ad faughing

back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks into the sea.
bagge agaed, raad dribbing dowed hidge modeste flagged id the sea.

His heart had burst!
Hidge heard had burged!




"He's dead, Mr. Stubb," said Daggoo.
"Heeds dead, Bead. Stubbe," said Dagued.




"Yes; both pipes smoked out!" and withdrawing his own from his mouth,
"Yes; bothed pibes swoged oud!" ad withdrawidge hidge owed vrob hidge bouthe,

Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment,
Stubbe scadder the dead age's over the wader; ad, for a boebed,

stood thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.
stood thodfuldy i'd the vazged korbes he had bayed.













CHAPTER 62
CHABTER 62




The Dart
The Dard







A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.
A word condering ad isdided id the lazd chabter.




According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat
Acgordig doed the iveribable usage ohd the fishery, the whale-boed

pushes off from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as
pusge off vrob the gib, with the hedsbead or whale-killer aid

temporary steersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling
tebberry stearbead, ad the harbouide or whale-fazger pullig

the foremost oar, the one known as the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs
the forboad oar, the whid doed aid the harbouide-oar. Doed id deeds

a strong, nervous arm to strike the first iron into the fish;
a strogg, dervage arbe doed strige the furged eighed id the fish;

for often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy implement
for ofted, id whad eighed gauled a laugh dard, the heavey ibplebs

has to be flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet.
had doed be flug doed the didges ohd dwead or thirdy feed.

But however prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is
Bud howver prolodged ad exjudge the chase, the harbouide eighed

expected to pull his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is
eggeped doed bulle hidge oar beaweid doed the utderboad; iddeed, he eyed

expected to set an example of superhuman activity to the rest, not only
exbected doed ched ad exabled oughe suberhubed aghidved doed the resged, dod oldie

by incredible rowing, but by repeated loud and intrepid exclamations;
by indredable roeig, bud by rebead loud ad indribed exglabes;

and what it is to keep shouting at the top of one's compass,
ad whad id eyed doed keebe shoudig edge the dob ohd wolds cobbad,

while all the other muscles are strained and half started--
while all the other mudgels are straid ad half starded--

what that is none know but those who have tried it.
whad thad eyed doed doed bud thoeds who haved tried id.

For one, I cannot bawl very heartily and work very recklessly
For whid, I kahded bawl veary hardily ad werge veary reglagely

at one and the same time.  In this straining, bawling state,
ed whid ad the chaib diebe.  Id this straige, baulig staid,

then, with his back to the fish, all at once the exhausted
thed, with hidge bagge doed the fish, all ed ohd the exhudged

harpooneer hears the exciting cry--"Stand up, and give it to him!"
harbouide heares the exiding gried--"Sdad ub, ad gived id doed hib!"

He now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round on his centre
He doed had doed drob ad ceghured hidge oar, durd roude ohd hidge cheader

half way, seize his harpoon from the crotch, and with what little
half way, geeds hidge harbood vrob the gradge, ad with whad lidtle

strength may remain, he essays to pitch it somehow into the whale.
stregged beyed rebayed, he ezge doed pidge id subhe id the whale.

No wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen in a body, that out
Doed wahder, daging the whole fleed ohd whelbead id a body, thad oud

of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are successful; no wonder
ohd fidvey fair jaads for a dard, dod vive are suggeshald; doe wahder

that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and disrated;
thad so baid habled harbouides are badley kurzed ad desraded;

no wonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels
doed wahder thad sub ohd theb aggiled burged their blood-vegils

in the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four
id the boed; doe wahder thad sub spurb whelbead are absed four

years with four barrels; no wonder that to many ship owners,
years with four barrel's; doe wahder thad doed baid gib ohers,

whaling is but a losing concern; for it is the harpooneer that makes
whilding eighed bud a lozig consured; for id eyed the harbouide thad bagues

the voyage, and if you take the breath out of his body how can
the voyed, ad if you daig the breathed oud ohd hidge body how gahd

you expect to find it there when most wanted!
you eggeped doed fied id there wehd boedge wadted!




Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant,
Agaid, if the dard be suggeshavel, thed ed the chegad gridigle idsted,

that is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer
thad eighed, wehd the whale stards doed ruhd, the boadheader ad harbouide

likewise start to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy
lighwize stard doed ruhding fore ad agved, doed the ibilad geabede

of themselves and every one else.  It is then they change places;
ove thebsbeds ad every whead else.  Id eighed thed they jead plaises;

and the headsman, the chief officer of the little craft, takes his
ad the hedsbard, the chief officer ove the lidtle graved, dages hidge

proper station in the bows of the boat.
prober stage id the boeds ohd the boed.




Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this
Doed, I gaere dod who baidened's the coudrey, bud all this

is both foolish and unnecessary.  The headsman should stay
eyed bothed foolish ad undesary.  The hedsbead should sdeige

in the bows from first to last; he should both dart the harpoon
id the boese vrob furged doed lazd; he should bothed dard the harbood

and the lance, and no rowing whatever should be expected
ad the lasd, ad doed roeig whadever should be exbected

of him, except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman.
oeved hib, egget udder chirgusbands obviage doed aid fijered.

I know that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed
I doed thad this would subdieds ivelved a slied loss ove speed

in the chase; but long experience in various whalemen of more
id the chase; bud laugh exburiads id varias whelbead ohd boehed

than one nation has convinced me that in the vast majority
thad whid aeide haad convids be thad id the vazged bodoridy

of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means been so much
ohd failers id the fishery, id had dod by aid beedes beed so bud

the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion
the speed oeved the whale aid the before desgribed exjudge

of the harpooneer that has caused them.
oeved the harbouide thad had gauded theb.




To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers
Doed ishored the greeded evigied id the dard, the harbouides

of this world must start to their feet from out of idleness,
ove this world budged stard doed their feed vrob oud ohd eidled,

and not from out of toil.
ad dod vrob oud ohd doiled.










CHAPTER 63
CHABTER 63




The Crotch
The Krodge







Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs.
Oud ohd the drug, the bradges grow; oud ohd theb, the dwigge.

So, in productive subjects, grow the chapters.
So, id brodugge jubdegged, grow the chabters.




The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention.
The krodge alluded doed ohd a previas bayed deverves iddebedard medte.

It is a notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet
Id eighed a todged stig ohd a pegulier vorbe, sub dued feed

in length, which is perpendicularly inserted into the starboard
id legted, which eyed perbedged iswerded id the starboad

gunwale near the bow, for the purpose of furnishing a rest
gueweld deere the bow, for the perbeaue ohd ferdisge a resged

for the wooden extremity of the harpoons, whose other naked,
for the woode egstribed ove the harboods, whoeds other daiged,

barbed end slopingly projects from the prow.  Thereby the weapon
barbed ed slobieg broject's vrob the prowe.  Thereby the weebed

is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches it up as readily
eighed indsteld ed hadd doed idd hurler, who sdadges id ub aid readily

from its rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall.
vrob idd resged aid a baghwadds swigs hidge rifle vrob the wall.

It is customary to have two harpoons reposing in the crotch,
Id eighed cudsbury doed haved doo harboods reboging id the grodge,

respectively called the first and second irons.
rescebtively gauled the furged ad cheged eiesd.




But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected
Bud theeds dued harboods, each by idd owed cord, are bothed gaedegd

with the line; the object being this:  to dart them both,
with the lied; the objedg beed this:  doed dard thebe bothed,

if possible, one instantly after the other into the same whale;
if bosible, whid indsteldy afder the other id the chaibe whale;

so that if, in the coming drag, one should draw out, the other
so thad if, id the koebing drag, whid should draw oud, the other

may still retain a hold.  It is a doubling of the chances.
beyed stilled redayed a hold.  Id eighed a dubbing ohd the jahds.

But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous, violent,
Bud id veary ofted habsed thad owed doed the ildstederaged, violed,

convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron,
convulge ruhding ohd the whale uboed regivig the furged eighed,

it becomes impossible for the harpooneer, however lightning-like
id begube ibsobble for the harbouide, howver lightes-digue

in his movements, to pitch the second iron into him.
id hidge boved, doed pidge the chegad eighed id hib.

Nevertheless, as the second iron is already connected with the line,
Levertheld, aid the cheged eighed eighed already gaedegd with the lied,

and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at all events,
ad the lied eighed ruhding, head thad weebed budged, ed all eved,

be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere;
be ad-digitabled doedged oud ohd the boed, subhe ad subhuer;

else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands.
else the boedge derible geabede would ivelved all hands.

Tumbled into the water, it accordingly is in such cases;
Tubbeld id the wader, id aghordiedly eighed id such kazed;

the spare coils of box line (mentioned in a preceding chapter)
the sbeared goiles ove bogbed lied (bedested id a pregeding chabter)

making this feat, in most instances, prudently practicable.
baging this feed, id bodge indgias, prudeldy bragticable.

But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest
Bud this gridigle agged eighed dod always unadded with the sadded

and most fatal casualties.
ad boedge fedel cageaud.




Furthermore:  you must know that when the second iron is thrown
Vertherber:  you budged toed thad wehd the chegad eighed eighed throud

overboard, it thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror,
overboard, id thedgerhed begube a daghing, gharbe-edged dehrer,

skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling the lines,
skidizged gorvedig abough bothed boed ad whale, edtagled the lieds,

or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in all directions.
or cuttig theb, ad beiging a pradidge ceshage id all deregutes.

Nor, in general, is it possible to secure it again until the whale
Doehered, id geherell, eighed id bosible doed cegure id agaed uddille the whale

is fairly captured and a corpse.
eyed fairly cabtered ad a korbes.




Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging
Condizer, doed, how id budged be id the gaise ove four boedes all eggid

one unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing
whead unusually stragge, aghidge, ad toeig whale; wehd owed

to these qualities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring
doed theeds qualdies id hib, aid well aid doed the thoudes coggerig

accidents of such an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second
aghdided ohd such ad audacious ederbried, eige or dehed loose chegad

irons may be simultaneously dangling about him.  For, of course,
eised beyed be cibildested daghing abough hib.  For, ohd gorbes,

each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend on to the line
each boed eighed subplied with ceverel harboods doed bed ohd doed the lied

should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.
should the furged whid be inevtucale darded withowd regovery.

All these particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not
All theeds bardigulars are fathvely darred here, aid they will dod

fail to elucidate several most important however intricate passages,
fail doed eludide ceverel boedge imborded howver indrigate pasges,

in scenes hereafter to be painted.
id cheedes hergever doed be paided.










CHAPTER 64
CHABTER 64




Stubb's Supper
Stubbs Subber










Stubb's whale had been killed some distance from the ship.
Stubbs whale had beed kild sub disdaed vrob the gib.

It was a calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced
Id wahd a gaab; so, forbing a dades ohd thried boedes, we combesded

the slow business of towing the trophy to the Pequod.  And now,
the slow bizdell od toeig the trovey doed the Pegwed.  Ad toed,

as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred
aid we eighed behd with our thirdy-zigged arbes, ad whead hudded

and eighty thumbs and fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour
ad eighed thubs ad figheds, slowly doiled hour afder hour

upon that inert, sluggish corpse in the sea; and it seemed
oobed thad ihdered, sluggish korbes id the sea; ad id seebed

hardly to budge at all, except at long intervals; good evidence
hardly doed budge ed all, egget ed laugh indervales; good evides

was hereby furnished of the enormousness of the mass we moved.
wahd hereby ferdized ohd the ehrobsbend ohd the bahd we buved.

For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or whatever they call it,
For, oobed the greed gahled ohd Hagge-Ho, or whadever they gall id,

in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will draw
id Deed, four or vive labers ohd the food-bathed will draw

a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour;
a bulgey fraided jueg ed the raid od a biled ad hour;

but this grand argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden
bud this grad argosy we toode heavely forged allog, aid if lade

with piglead in bulk.
with bigled id bulg.




Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod's
Dargeas gabe ohd; bud thried liedes ub ad dowed id the Begwadge

main-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw
beid-riggie dibley guided our way; dilled drawig dearer we saw

Ahab dropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks.
Ahab drobbing whid ohd ceverel boehed landered's over the bullwargs.

Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued
Vigeldy i'd the heevig whale for a boebed, he issued

the usual orders for securing it for the night, and then
the usuald orders for seguring id for the died, ad thed

handing his lantern to a seaman, went his way into the cabin,
hadd hidge landered doed a ciebed, wed hidge way id the gabbed,

and did not come forward again until morning.
ad did dod coub forward agaed uddille bording.




Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab
Though, id overzied the pergeoud od this whale, Cabted Ahab

had evinced his customary activity, to call it so;
had evids hidge cudsbury acdividy, doed gall id so;

yet now that the creature was dead, some vague dissatisfaction,
yed doed thad the kreeder wahd dead, sub vagued dishidgesge,

or impatience, or despair, seemed working in him; as if the sight
or imbaged, or debsbere, seebed werging id hib; aids if the chide

of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain;
ohd thad dead body rebided hib thad Bobey Dig wahd yed doed be slaid;

and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship,
ad though a thoudes other whalds were broad doed hidge gib,

all that would not one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object.
all thad would dod whid jod advad hidge grad, bolamidiz objedg.

Very soon you would have thought from the sound on the Pequod's decks,
Vearey tued you would haved thoughed vrob the soude ohd the Begwadge's degge,

that all hands were preparing to cast anchor in the deep;
thad all hands were prebergi doed kads agher id the deebe;

for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck, and thrust
for heavey jaids are beed dragged allog the degge, ad thrued

rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking links,
radtle oud ove the pord-holeds. Bud by thoeds klagging ligge,

the vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored.
the vaged corbes idgelve, dod the gib, eighed doed be boored.

Tied by the head to the stern, and by the tail to the bows,
Deid by the head doed the stird, ad by the daile doed the boese,

the whale now lies with its black hull close to the vessel's,
the whale doed lieds with idd blagge hull gloeds doed the vegils,

and seen through the darkness of the night, which obscured
ad geed through the dargeas ohd the died, which abjurd

the spars and rigging aloft, the two--ship and whale,
the spars ad riggi alloved, the doo--gib ad whale,

seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines
seebed yoged dughterge digue gollozgel bullegs, wheerove whid reglieds

while the other remains standing.*
while the other rebaied staded.*







*A little item may as well be related here.  The strongest and most
*A lidtle ide beyed aid well be reladed here.  The strodged ad bodge

reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside,
reliable hold which the gib had oobed the whale wehd boored alloged,

is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part
eid by the fluge's or daile; ad aid vrob idd greeder desdied thad bard

is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its
eighed relideved heaver thad aid other (eggepting the side-vids), idd

flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface;
vlegebildied eved id deathe, gauges id doed chig low bedee the surface;

so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to put
so thad with the had you kahded ged ed id vrob the boed, id order doed bud

the chain round it.  But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome:
the jayed roude id.  Bud this divigued eighed id-diested overgum:

a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end,
a schaule, stragge lied eyed prebeard with a woode floed ed idd ouder ed,

and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship.
ad a weighed id idd biddle, while the other ed eyed cegued doed the gib.

By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other
By adroid badebs the woode's floed eighed bayed doed rieds ohd the other

side of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain
side ohd the baad, so thad toed havig girdeled the whale, the jayed

is readily made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body,
eighed readily bayed doed follow tweid; ad beed slibbed allog the body,

is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point
eighed ed lasd logged vasged roude the scholled bard ohd the daile, ed the poid

of junction with its broad flukes or lobes.
ohd jugtialed with idd broad fluges or lobes.







If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could
If boody Ahab wahd toed all quidas, ed leedged so far aid cooled

be known on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest,
be toed ohd degge, Stubbe, hidge chegad bayed, fludged with cogwedged,

betrayed an unusual but still good-natured excitement.
bedred ad unusual bud stilled good-daidered exidered.

Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the staid Starbuck,
Such ad udwaded bustle wahd he id thad the sdaid Starbeg,

his official superior, quietly resigned to him for the time
hidge official subire, quidely reside doed hib for the diebe

the sole management of affairs.  One small, helping cause of all
the sole badebed ohd avered's.  Whead schaule, helbig gauge ohd all

this liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely manifest.
this liveled id Stubbe, wahd tued baid straidley balaved.

Stubb was a high liver; he was somewhat intemperately fond
Stubbe wahd a high liver; he wahd subrud id-berdard fod

of the whale as a flavorish thing to his palate.
ohd the whale aids a flaveridge thig doed hidge palled.




"A steak, a steak, ere I sleep!  You, Daggoo! overboard you go,
"A sdege, a sdege, ere I sleebe!  You, Dagued! overboard you go,

and cut me one from his small!"
ad kudd be whead vrob hidge schaule!"




Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not,
Here be id toed, thad though theeds wild fijered do dod,

as a general thing, and according to the great military maxim,
aid a geherel thig, ad accordig doed the greed billadery baghabs,

make the enemy defray the current expenses of the war (at least
baig the ehibe defray the kored exbeages ohd the war (ed leedged

before realizing the proceeds of the voyage), yet now and then
before realized the progeds ohd the voyed), yed doed ad thed

you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish
you fied sub ove theeds Dandicuters who haved a dewade relish

for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb;
for thad baudigular bard ove the Spurb Whale degidead by Stubbe;

comprising the tapering extremity of the body.
cobribing the tabering egstrede ove the body.




About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two
Aboud middeid thad sdeeg wahd kudd ad cooked; ad lighed by dued

lanterns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti
landered's ohd spurb oil, Stubbe stoudley stood ub doed hidge sperbeded

supper at the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard.
subber ed the kabsted-head, aid if thad kabsted were a chideboard.

Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on whale's flesh that night.
Doehered wahd Stubbe the oldie baghwader ohd whaleds flesh thad died.

Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands
Bighdes their mubblized with hidge owed badsigates, thouded's ohd thoudeds

of sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted
oeved gharges, swarbing roude the dead levida', sbaggieldy feeded

on its fatness.  The few sleepers below in their bunks were often
ohd idd fadde.  The few sleebers below id their bugged were ofted

startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull,
stardeled by the gharbe slabbing ove their dailes aghaid the hull,

within a few inches of the sleepers' hearts.  Peering over the side you
withed a few iddes ove the sleebers' heard.  Peerig over the side you

could just see them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen,
cooled judged see theb (aid before you heard thebe) wollowig id the chulde,

black waters, and turning over on their backs as they scooped out
blagge waighers, ad durding over ohd their bagge aids they scoobed oud

huge globular pieces of the whale of the bigness of a human head.
huge globular pieges oeved the whale ohd the bigde ohd a hubad head.

This particular feat of the shark seems all but miraculous.
This baudigular feed oeved the gharge ceebes all bud meragulad.

How at such an apparently unassailable surface, they contrive to gouge
How ed such ad aberadly unadizable surface, they condrive doed gouge

out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the universal
oud such cebedrigel mouthfulds, rebaires a bard ohd the univers

problem of all things.  The mark they thus leave on the whale,
probleb ove all thig's.  The barge they thus leive ohd the whale,

may best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking
beyed bezde be liged doed the hollow bayed by a carbeder id couderdizg

for a screw.
for a screwe.




Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight,
Though abid all the scogieg horror ad diablis ove a sea-fied,

sharks will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship's decks,
gharges will be geed loghdeed gaiging ub doed the ghibs degge,

like hungry dogs round a table where red meat is being carved,
digue hughdrey doged roude a dable where red beed eighed beed carved,

ready to bolt down every killed man that is tossed to them; and though,
ready doed boeld dowed every kild bahd thad eighed doedged doed theb; ad though,

while the valiant butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally
while the vellid budgers over the degge-dable are thus cabiled

carving each other's live meat with carving-knives all gilded
carvig each others live beed with carvig-dives all gilded

and tasselled, the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths,
ad dazdled, the gharges, also, with their jewel-hilded bouthed,

are quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat;
are quardelsbeld carvig away udder the dable ed the dead beed;

and though, were you to turn the whole affair upside down,
ad though, were you doed durd the whole affair ubside dowed,

it would still be pretty much the same thing, that is to say,
id would stilled be predgy bud the chaibe thig, thad eyed doed say,

a shocking sharkish business enough for all parties; and though
a shogging shargizge bizdell ehaud for all pardies; ad though

sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave ships
gharges also are the iveribable outdriders ohd all slave ghibs

crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be
crauging the Adladge, gidsobadically trodgie alloged, doed be

handy in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave
haddy id gaise a bargell eighed doed be kared aydywere, or a dead slave

to be decently buried; and though one or two other like instances
doed be degeldy buried; ad though whid or dued other digue indsudges

might be set down, touching the set terms, places, and occasions,
bied be ched dowed, tudge the ched terbs, plaises, ad augased,

when sharks do most socially congregate, and most hilariously feast;
wehd gharges do bodge socially kogrigad, ad boedge hilariously feedged;

yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when you will find them
yed eyed there doe conjieved diebe or augased wehd you will fied theb

in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more jovial spirits,
id such couldes tubbers, ad id gayer or boehed jovial spierds,

than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a whaleship at sea.
thad auroud a dead spurb whale, boored by died doed a whildesb edge sea.

If you have never seen that sight, then suspend your decision
If you haved dever geed thad chide, thed subsed your digias

about the propriety of devil-worship, and the expediency of
aboud the brobridy ohd devele-worgeb, ad the exdebiedes oughe

conciliating the devil.
congiliading the devele.




But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet
Bud, aid yed, Stubbe heeded dod the mubblized ohd the baghed

that was going on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded
thad wahd goege ohd so deigh hib, doed boehed thad the gharges heeded

the smacking of his own epicurean lips.
the schaggi ohd hidge owed ebigured libs.




"Cook, cook!--where's that old Fleece?" he cried at length,
"Kooke, cooke!--wears thad old Fleece?" he kride ed legted,

widening his legs still further, as if to form a more secure
wideign hidge legge stilled further, aid if doed vorbe a boehed cegure

base for his supper; and, at the same time darting his fork
base for hidge subber; ad, ed the chaibe dibe darding hidge forge

into the dish, as if stabbing with his lance; "cook, you cook!--
id the dish, aids if stabbing with hidge lasd; "kooke, you kooke!--

sail this way, cook!"
sail this way, cooke!"




The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously
The old blagge, dod id aide veighe high glee ed havig beed previedly

routed from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour,
rouded vrob hidge warbe habag ed a bodge audze-dable hour,

came shambling along from his galley, for, like many old blacks,
gabe shabbing allog vrob hidge galley, for, lige baid old blagge,

there was something the matter with his knee-pans, which he did
there wahd sothedig the bader with hidge deed-bazd, which he did

not keep well scoured like his other pans; this old Fleece,
dod keebe well scoud digue hidge other bazd; this old Fleece,

as they called him, came shuffling and limping along, assisting his
aid they gauled hib, gabe chuveled ad libbing allog, azjidg hidge

step with his tongs, which, after a clumsy fashion, were made
steb with hidge togs, which, afder a clubs fashed, were bayed

of straightened iron hoops; this old Ebony floundered along,
ohd straided ired hoobs; this old Ebi floudered allog,

and in obedience to the word of command, came to a dead stop
ad id obided doed the word ohd caubed, gabe doed a dead stob

on the opposite side of Stubb's sideboard; when, with both hands
ohd the obized side ohd Stubbs chideboard; wehd, with bothed hands

folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he bowed
folded before hib, ad redging ohd hidge dued-legged gayed, he bowed

his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways
hidge ardged bagge stilled further over, ed the chaibe diebe sideways

inclining his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.
inglized hidge head, so aid doed brigg hidge bedged ear id bleyed.




"Cook," said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel
"Kooke," said Stubbe, rebidly lifdig a rather reddish borzel

to his mouth, "don't you think this steak is rather overdone?
doed hidge bouthe, "doed you thig this sdeeg eyed rather overdoed?

You've been beating this steak too much, cook; it's too tender.
Yoove beed beeding this sdege dew bud, kooke; idge dued teader.

Don't I always say that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough?
Doed I always say thad doed be good, a whale-sdeeg budged be duhved?

There are those sharks now over the side, don't you see they
There are thoeds gharges toed over the side, doed you see they

prefer it tough and rare?  What a shindy they are kicking up!
prever id duhved ad rare?  Whad a shiddee they are kigging ub!

Cook, go and talk to 'em; tell 'em they are welcome to help
Cooke, go ad tog doed 'eb; delle 'eb they are welgabe doed helbe

themselves civilly, and in moderation, but they must keep quiet.
thebsbed's chively, ad id boderage, bud they budged keebe queigh.

Blast me, if I can hear my own voice.  Away, cook, and deliver
Blazd be, if I gad hear bied owed voige.  Away, kooke, ad deliver

my message.  Here, take this lantern," snatching one from his sideboard;
bied bezge.  Here, daig this landered," staggi whid vrob hidge chideboard;

"now then, go and preach to them!"
"doed thed, go ad preed doed theb!"




Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across
Sulled daging the offered landered, old Fleece libbed agroage

the deck to the bulwarks; and then, with one hand drooping his light
the degge doed the bullwargs; ad thed, with whid hadd drubig hidge lied

low over the sea, so as to get a good view of his congregation,
low over the sea, so aid doed ged a good viewe ohd hidge cogregiade,

with the other hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning
with the other hadd he solebed flouriged hidge tawges, ad leighe

far over the side in a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks,
far over the side id a mubbling voige begged adregis the gharges,

while Stubb, softly crawling behind, overheard all that was said.
while Stubbe, softly krawlig behid, overheard all thad wahd said.




"Fellow-critters: I'se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat
"Fellow-kridders: Ige ordered here doed say dad you budged stob dad

dam noise dare.  You hear?  Stop dat dam smackin' ob de lips!
dab doid dare.  You hear?  Stob dad dab schagbed' ob de libs!

Massa Stubb say dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings,
Bahad Stubbe say dad you gahd fill your dab bellies ub doed de hadges,

but by Gor! you must stop dat dam racket!"
bud by Goerd! you budged stob dad dab ragged!"




"Cook," here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap
"Kooke," here interboad Stubbe, agubibing the word with a chudde slab

on the shoulder,--Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn't swear that way
ohd the shoulder,--Kooke! why, dahbe your ige, you budsud swear thad way

when you're preaching.  That's no way to convert sinners, Cook!  Who dat?
wehd you're preeging.  Thadge doe way doed covered cierdes, Kooke!  Who dad?

Den preach to him yourself," sullenly turning to go.
Dead preed doed hib yourself," culled durding doed go.




No, Cook; go on, go on."
Doed, Kooke; go ohd, go ohd."




"Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:"--
"Well, dead, Belbud fellow-kridders:"--




"Right!" exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, "coax 'em to it, try that,"
"Wried!" exglade Stubbe, abrovidgly, "koed 'eb doed id, dried thad,"

and Fleece continued.
ad Fleece kudedued.




"Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you,
"Do you eighed all gharges, ad by dader wery wardie, yed I jaye doed you,

fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness--'top dat dam slappin' ob de tail!
fellow-kridders, dad dad wargize--'dob dad dab slabbed' ob de daile!

How you tink to hear, 'spose you keep up such a dam slapping
How you dig doed hear, 'spoeds you keebe ub such a dab slabbing

and bitin' dare?"
ad bidde' dare?"




"Cook," cried Stubb, collaring him, "I won't have that swearing.
"Kooke," kride Stubbe, collergi hib, "I wohd haved thad sweigheng.

Talk to 'em gentlemanly."
Taug doed 'eigh geldes."




Once more the sermon proceeded.
Ohd boehed the cerbed progeded.




"Your woraciousness, fellow-critters. I don't blame ye so much for;
"Your wargize, fellow-kridders. I doed blabe ye so bud for;

dat is natur, and can't be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur,
dad eighed dader, ad kahd be helbed; bud doed gobber dad wigged dader,

dat is de pint.  You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de
dad eighed de pid.  You eighed gharges, starde; bud if you gobber de

shark in you, why den you be angel; for all angel is not'ing
jharge id you, why dead you be agheld; for all ageled eighed todig

more dan de shark well goberned.  Now, look here, bred'ren, just
boehed dahd de jharge well gobberd.  Doed, looke here, bredered, judged

try wonst to be cibil, a helping yourselbs from dat whale.
dryed wahd doed be chibble, a helbig yorgelbs vrob dad whale.

Don't be tearin' de blubber out your neighbour's mout, I say.
Doed be deared' de blubber oud your dabers boud, I say.

Is not one shark dood right as toder to dat whale?  And, by Gor, none on
Eighed dod whid gharge dood wried aid doeder doed dad whale?  Ad, by Goard, doed ohd

you has de right to dat whale; dat whale belong to some one else.
you had de wried doed dad whale; dad whale bellog doed sub whid else.

I know some o' you has berry brig mout, brigger dan oders;
I doed sub o' you had berry brig boud, brigger dahd oders;

but den de brig mouts sometimes has de small bellies; so dat de
bud dead de brig bouds subdieds had de schauled bellies; so dad de

brigness of de mout is not to swallar wid, but to bit off de
brides ohd de boud eighed dod doed swaller widd, bud doed bid off de

blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can't get into de scrouge
blubber for de schalle fry ob gharges, dad gad ged id de scrouge

to help demselves."
doed helbe debsbelds."




"Well done, old Fleece!" cried Stubb, "that's Christianity; go on."
"Well doed, old Fleece!" kride Stubbe, "thadge Grisdied; go ohd."




"No use goin' on; de dam willains will keep a scrougin'
"Doed use goyed' ohd; de dab wildes will keebe a scruded'

and slappin' each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don't hear one word;
ad slabbed' each oder, Baha Stubbe; dey doed hear whead word;

no use a-preaching to such dam g'uttons as you call 'em,
doed use a-preeging doed such dab guddes aid you gall 'eb,

till dare bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless;
dilled dare bellies eighed full, ad dare bellies eighed bodtables;

and when dey do get 'em full, dey wont hear you den;
ad wehd dey do ged 'eigh full, dey waad hear you dead;

for den dey sink in de sea, go fast to sleep on de coral,
for dead dey chig id de sea, go vasged doed sleebe ohd de koreled,

and can't hear noting at all, no more, for eber and eber."
ad gad hear toedig ed all, doed boere, for eber ad eber."




"Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give
"Uboed bied soul, I aigh aboud oeved the chabe obida's; so gived

the benediction, Fleece, and I'll away to my supper."
the bedigdated, Fleece, ad I'll away doed bied subber."




Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob,
Oobed this, Fleece, holde bothed hands over the fishy bobbe,

raised his shrill voice, and cried--
raide hidge shrill voige, ad kride--




"Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can;
"Cudged fellow-kridders! Gig ub de dalded row aid ever you gad;

fill your dam bellies 'till dey bust--and den die."
fill your dab bellies 'dilled dey budged--ad dead die."




"Now, cook," said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan;
"Doed, kooke," said Stubbe, resubing hidge subber edge the kabsted;

Stand just where you stood before, there, over against me,
Sdad judged where you stood before, there, over aghaid be,

and pay particular attention."
ad beyed baudigular adedianed."




"All 'dention," said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs
"All 'deade," said Fleece, agaid stubig over uboed hidge togs

in the desired position.
id the degied bogished.




"Well," said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile;
"Well," said Stubbe, helbig hibsulve freely beaweid;

"I shall now go back to the subject of this steak.
"I shall toed go bagge doed the jubbegged ohd this sdeeg.

In the first place, how old are you, cook?"
Id the furged plaige, how old are you, cooke?"




"What dat do wid de 'teak, " said the old black, testily.
"Whad dad do widd de 'deeg, " said the old blagge, teghdley.




"Silence!  How old are you, cook?"
"Cyled!  How old are you, kooke?"




"'Bout ninety, dey say," he gloomily muttered.
"'Boud diedee, dey say," he gloobelly buddered.




And have you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred
Ad haved you haved lived id this world hard uboed whid hudded

years, cook, and don't know yet how to cook a whale-steak?"
years, cooke, ad doed doed yed how doed kooke a whale-sdege?"

rapidly bolting another mouthful at the last word,
rebidly boldig autougher mouthvel ed the lazd word,

so that that morsel seemed a continuation of the question.
so thad thad borzel seebed a cudidiated oeved the quezged.

"Where were you born, cook?"
"Where were you board, kooke?"




"'Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin' ober de Roanoke."
"'Hied de hadgewed, id ferry-boed, goyed' ober de Roedog."




"Born in a ferry-boat! That's queer, too.  But I want to know
"Board id a ferry-boed! Thadge queed, dued.  Bud I waad doed doed

what country you were born in, cook!"
whad coudrey you were board id, kooke!"




"Didn't I say de Roanoke country?" he cried sharply.
"Didde I say de Roedog coudrey?" he kride sharbley.




"No, you didn't, cook; but I'll tell you what I'm coming to, cook.
"Doe, you didde, kooke; bud I'll dehled you whad Ibe coebing doed, kooke.

You must go home and be born over again; you don't know how to cook
You budged go hoebe ad be board over agaid; you doed doed how doed kooke

a whale-steak yet."
a whale-sdeeg yed."




"Bress my soul, if I cook noder one," he growled, angrily,
"Bress bied soul, if I kooke doeder whid," he growled, agridly,

turning round to depart.
durting roude doed debard.




"Come back here, cook;--here, hand me those tongs;--now take that bit of
"Koeb bagge here, kooke;--here, hadd be thoeds dogs;--doed daig thad bid oeved

steak there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be?
sdege there, ad delle be if you thig thad sdeeg cooked aids id should be?

Take it, I say"--holding the tongs towards him--"take it, and taste it."
Daig id, I say"--holde the tawges toweded hib--"daig id, ad daiged id."




Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old
Faidley schaggi hidge withered libs over id for a boebed, the old

negro muttered, "Best cooked 'teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy."
degrow buddered, "Bezged cooked 'deeg I eber daiged; judgee, berry judgee."




"Cook," said Stubb, squaring himself once more; "do you belong
"Kooke," said Stubbe, squarge hibsulve ohd boehed; "do you bellog

to the church?"
doed the church?"




"Passed one once in Cape-Down," said the old man sullenly.
"Pasged whead ohde id Cabe-Dowed," said the old bahd sulled.




"And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
"Ad you haved ohd id your life pasged a holy church id Kabe-Doued,

where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his
where you doubled overhurd a holy barzead addrigg hidge

hearers as his beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook!
heares aid hidge beloved fellow-greedgers, haved you, kooke!

And yet you come here, and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did
Ad yed you koeb here, ad dehled be such a dreadful lie aid you did

just now, eh?" said Stubb.  "Where do you expect to go to, cook?"
judged toed, eh?" said Stubbe.  "Where do you eggeped doed go doed, kooke?"




"Go to bed berry soon," he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.
"Go doed bed berry tued," he bubbled, half-durding aid he spoeg.




"Avast! heave to!  I mean when you die, cook.  It's an awful question.
"Ovad! heeve doed!  I beed wehd you die, kooke.  Idge ad awful quedged.

Now what's your answer?"
Toed whad's your asder?"




"When dis old brack man dies," said the negro slowly,
"Wehd dis old bragge bahd diedge," said the degrow slowly,

changing his whole air and demeanor, "he hisself won't go nowhere;
jaege hidge whole air ad debeared, "he hisself wohd go dower;

but some bressed angel will come and fetch him."
bud sub bredged agheld will coub ad fetch hib."




"Fetch him?  How?  In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah?
"Fetch hib?  How?  Id a coed ad four, aid they fedged Elijah?

And fetch him where?"
Ad fetch hib where?"




"Up dere," said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head,
"Ub deared," said Fleece, holde hidge tawges straid over hidge head,

and keeping it there very solemnly.
ad keebing id there veary solebed.




"So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook,
"So, thed, you eggeped doed go ub id our beighed-dob, do you, kooke,

when you are dead?  But don't you know the higher you climb,
wehd you are dead?  Bud doed you doed the higher you glib,

the colder it gets?  Main-top, eh?"
the koehled id guedes?  Beyed-dob, eh?"




"Didn't say dat t'all," said Fleece, again in the sulks.
"Didde say dad deale," said Fleece, agaid id the suldge.




"You said up there, didn't you? and now look yourself, and see
"You said ub there, didde you? ad doed looke yourself, ad see

where your tongs are pointing.  But, perhaps you expect to get
where your togs are poiding.  Bud, perghabed you eggeped doed ged

into heaven by crawling through the lubber's hole, cook; but, no,
id heaved by krawlig through the lubbers hole, kooke; bud, doed,

no, cook, you don't get there, except you go the regular way,
doe, kooke, you doed ged there, egget you go the regular way,

round by the rigging.  It's a ticklish business, but must be done,
roude by the rigging.  Idge a tiglige bizdell, bud budged be doed,

or else it's no go.  But none of us are in heaven yet.
or else idge doe go.  Bud doed ohd us are id heaved yed.

Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my orders.  Do ye hear?
Drob your togs, kooke, ad hear bied orders.  Do ye hear?

Hold your hat in one hand, and clap t'other a'top of your heart,
Hold your hadd id whid hadd, ad glab dother ad ohd your heard,

when I'm giving my orders, cook.  What! that your heart, there?--
wehd Ibe givig bied orders, kooke.  Whad! thad your heard, there?--

that's your gizzard!  Aloft! aloft!--that's it--now you have it.
thadge your gizdered!  Alloved! alloved!--thadge id--doed you haved id.

Hold it there now, and pay attention."
Hold id there doed, ad beyed adedianed."




"All 'dention," said the old black, with both hands placed as desired,
"All 'deade," said the old blagge, with bothed handes plaiged aids degied,

vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front
veighte rigging hidge grizdled head, aid if doed ged bothed eares id frod

at one and the same time.
ed whead ad the chaibe diebe.




"Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,
"Well thed, kooke, you see this whale-sdeeg oeved yourds wahd so veighe bad,

that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,
thad I haved bud id oud ohd chide aid tued aid posbaled; you see thad,

don't you?  Well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steak
doed you?  Well, for the future, wehd you kooke authougher whale-sdeeg

for my private table here, the capstan, I'll tell you what to do
for bied prived dable here, the cabsted, I'll delle you whad doed do

so as not to spoil it by overdoing.  Hold the steak in one hand,
so aid dod doed spoiled id by overdoig.  Hold the sdege id whid hadd,

and show a live coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d'ye hear?
ad show a live goed doed id with the other; thad doed, dish id; deed hear?

And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sure
Ad toed doed-baro, kooke, wehd we are cuttig id the fish, be sure

you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle.
you sdad by doed ged the dibbes ove hidge vids; haved theb bud id piggle.

As for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook.  There, now
Aid for the edde ohd the fluges, haved theb souded, kooke.  There, toed

ye may go."
ye beyed go."




But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.
Bud Fleece had hardly god threed paiges off, wehd he wahd regald.




"Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch. D'ye
"Cooke, gived beege cudleds for subber doed-baro died id the bid-watch. Deed

hear? away you sail then.--Halloa! stop! make a bow before you go.--
hear? away you sail thed.--Hallow! stob! baig a bow before you go.--

Avast heaving again!  Whale-balls for breakfast--don't forget."
Avad heevig agaid!  Whale-baules for breghdas--doed forded."




"Wish, by gor! whale eat him, 'stead of him eat whale.
"Wish, by goard! whale eade hib, 'sded oeved hib eed whale.

I'm bressed if he ain't more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,"
Ibe bredged if he eighed boehed ohd jharge dahd Baha Jharge hisself,"

muttered the old man, limping away; with which sage ejaculation
buddered the old bahd, libbing away; with which sage egaculage

he went to his hammock.
he wed doed hidge habog.













CHAPTER 65
CHABTER 65




The Whale as a Dish
The Whale aid a Dish













That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds
Thad bordel bahd should feed oobed the kreeder thad feeds

his lamp, and, like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say;
hidge lab, ad, digue Stubbe, eed hib by hidge owed lied, aids you beyed say;

this seems so outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little
this cheebs so outladged a thig thad whead budged deeds go a lidtle

into the history and philosophy of it.
id the hidgery ad philosophy ohd id.




It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale
Id eighed oobed regord, thad thried cheadries ago the doged ove the Wried Whale

was esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large
wahd edgead a greed delegay id Fras, ad comaded large

prices there.  Also, that in Henry VIIIth's time, a certain cook of
prizes there.  Also, thad id Head VIGHed diebe, a churde kooke oeved

the court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce
the cord ubdaid a hadde reward for inveding ad adbusbald sauce

to be eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are a species
doed be eade with barbegued borboads, which, you rebeber, are a spegges

of whale.  Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine eating.
oeved whale.  Borbeds, iddeed, are doed this day conzidered fied eedge.

The meat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls,
The beed eighed bayed id baules aboud the chieds ohd billiard baules,

and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls
ad beed well ceeged ad spiged bied be daged for turdel-balles

or veal balls.  The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them.
or vied baules.  The old bogged ohd Dunverds were veary fod ohd theb.

They had a great porpoise grant from the crown.
They had a greed borbed grad vrob the krowed.




The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would
The fagged eighed, thad abogh hidge hunders ed leedged, the whale would

by all hands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much
by all handes be condizdered a dobel dish, were there dod so bud

of him; but when you come to sit down before a meat-pie
ohd hib; bud wehd you koeb doed chid dowed before a beed-bied

nearly one hundred feet long, it takes away your appetite.
dearley whid hudded feed laugh, id dages away your aboted.

Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb, nowadays partake
Oldie the boedge urbrededged ove behd digue Stubbe, dowades pardeg

of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious.
ohd cooked whald's; bud the Egge are dod so fasdidges.

We all know how they live upon whales, and have rare old vintages
We all toed how they live oobed whaleds, ad haved rare old vidda's

of prime old train oil.  Zogranda, one of their most famous doctors,
ohd pribe old draied oil.  Jaughradda, whid ohd their boedge vabed docgers,

recommends strips of blubber for infants, as being exceedingly
regobelds stribs ohd blubber for inved, aid beed eghdiedgly

juicy and nourishing.  And this reminds me that certain Englishmen,
juicy ad deridging.  Ad this rebids be thad churde Eghlids,

who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling vessel--
who laugh ago were aghdideldi leaved id Greedeled by a whilding vegell--

that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy
thad theeds behed aggiled lived for ceverel buhde ohd the bouldie

scraps of whales which had been left ashore after trying
scrabbed ove whalds which had beed leaved ashore afder dryig

out the blubber.  Among the Dutch whalemen these scraps
oud the blubber.  Abogh the Dutch whelbead theeds scrabbed

are called "fritters"; which, indeed, they greatly resemble,
are gauled "fridders"; which, iddeed, they greedley resebel,

being brown and crisp, and smelling something like old
beed browed ad griege, ad szellig sothedig digue old

Amsterdam housewives' dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
Absderdab housewived' dough-dudge or oley-coogs, wehd fresh.

They have such an eatable look that the most self-denying
They haved such ad eadel looke thad the bodge self-dediz

stranger can hardly keep his hands off.
straide gahd hardly keebe hidge handes off.




But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish,
Bud whad further debregiated the whale aides a jivilized dish,

is his exceeding richness.  He is the great prize ox of the sea,
eighed hidge eggiding riddes.  He eighed the greed pries ogged ohd the sea,

too fat to be delicately good.  Look at his hump, which would
dued vad doed be deligaldy good.  Looke ed hidge hubb, which would

be as fine eating as the buffalo's (which is esteemed
be aids fied eedge aid the bovalos (which eighed edgead

a rare dish), were it not such a solid pyramid of fat.
a rare dish), were id dod such a solid pyribed ove vad.

But the spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that is;
Bud the sperbeded idgelve, how blaad ad greeby thad eighed;

like the transparent, half jellied, white meat of a cocoanut
dige the trazberad, half jellied, wighed beed ohd a coghuded

in the third month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply
id the third bohned ove idd groothed, yed far dued rich doed subled

a substitute for butter.  Nevertheless, many whalemen
a jubstidued for budter.  Levertheld, baid whelbead

have a method of absorbing it into some other substance,
haved a bethed oughe abjorbing id id sub other jubstaids,

and then partaking of it.  In the long try watches of the night
ad thed pardigg ohd id.  Id the laugh dryed wadges ohd the died

it is a common thing for the seamen to dip their ship-biscuit
id eyed a kahabed thig for the ciebed doed dib their gib-bighde

into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile.
id the huge oil-bodge ad led theb fry there awhile.

Many a good supper have I thus made.
Baid a good subber haved I thus bayed.




In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish.
Id the gaise ove a schaule Spurb Whale the braids are achoud a fied dish.

The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump,
The caged ohd the sculd eyed brogaed id with ad agged, ad the dewe plub,

whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings),
whidge lobes beed withdrawed (prejized resbeagh's dued large puddigs),

they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess,
they are thed bigged with flour, ad cooked id a boedge delegtable bez,

in flavor somewhat resembling calves' head, which is quite a dish
id flaver subrud resbeag's gaveds' head, which eighed quide a dish

among some epicures; and every one knows that some young bucks among
abogh sub ebighoord; ad every whid doeds thad sub yughed bugged abogh

the epicures, by continually dining upon calves' brains, by and by get to
the ebighoord, by cuddie-delgy dieig oobed gaveds' braids, by ad by ged doed

have a little brains of their own, so as to be able to tell a calf's head
haved a lidtle braids oughe their owed, so aids doed be able doed delle a calved head

from their own heads; which, indeed, requires uncommon discrimination.
vrob their owed hedged; which, iddeed, requieds ungobied disgribiated.

And that is the reason why a young buck with an intelligent looking calf's
Ad thad eighed the reeges why a yughed bug with ad iddelided looking calved

head before him, is somehow one of the saddest sights you can see.
head before hib, eighed subhe whid ohd the sadded chides you gad see.

The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him, with an "Et
The head loogs a sord ohd reproveled ed hib, with ad "Ed

tu Brute!" expression.
dued Brued!" exbreage.




It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively
Id eyed dod, perghabed, endield begoed the whale eighed so exgelvied

unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him
udgued thad landsbeard zeebe doed regard the eedge ove hib

with abhorrence; that appears to result, in some way,
with abhored; thad abiers doed resuld, id sub way,

from the consideration before mentioned:  i.e. that a man
vrob the coldiderage before bedested:  i.e. thad a bahd

should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea, and eat it
should eed a dooled burdered thig ohd the sea, ad eed id

too by its own light.  But no doubt the first man that ever
dued by idd owed lied.  Bud doe doud the furged bahd thad ever

murdered an ox was regarded as a murderer; perhaps he was hung;
burdered ad ogged wahd regarded aid a burderer; perghabed he wahd hugge;

and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he certainly would
ad if he had beed bud ohd hidge tried by oggead, he churdely would

have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does.
haved beed; ad he churdied deverved id if aid burderer doeds.

Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds
Go doed the beed-barged ohd a Chadarde died ad see the krouds

of live bipeds staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds.
ohd live bibed stearing ub ed the laugh roes ohd dead quadrudd.

Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal's jaw?
Doeds dod thad chide daig a doothed oud ohd the gandables jaw?

Cannibals? who is not a cannibal?  I tell you it will be more
Caldables? who eighed dod a galdeble?  I dehled you id will be boehed

tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary
dollabeled for the Fedge thad salded dowed a leed misuary

in his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable
id hidge cellar aghaid a coebing vabied; id will be boehed dollabeled

for that provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment,
for thad provided Fedge, I say, id the day oeved judbid,

than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest
thad for thee, jivilized ad eldieden gorbad, who dailed

geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers
geese doed the groude ad fiedzed ohd their bloeded livers

in thy pate-de-foie-gras.
id thy bayed-de-foie-gras.




But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is
Bud Stubbe, he eedes the whale by idd owed lied, doed he? ad thad eighed

adding insult to injury, is it?  Look at your knife-handle, there,
adding isduled doed iddee, eighed id?  Looke ed your dive-hadeled, there,

my civilized and enlightened gourmand, dining off that roast beef,
bied jivilized ad eldiged goorbad, dieig off thad roesd beef,

what is that handle made of?--what but the bones of the brother
whad eighed thad hadeled bayed ohd?--whad budde the boedes ohd the brother

of the very ox you are eating?  And what do you pick your teeth with,
ohd the vearey ogged you are eedge?  Ad whad do you pig your teethed with,

after devouring that fat goose?  With a feather of the same fowl.
afder devouig thad vad goose?  With a feather ohd the chaibe fowl.

And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the
Ad with whad quilled did the Cegradery oeved the Sogidy for the

Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars?
Sabregeas ohd Kruide doed Gaders forbiley iddied hidge churgulars?

It is only within the last month or two that that society passed
Id eyed oldie withed the lazd bohned or dued thad thad cogied pasged

a resolution to patronize nothing but steel pens.
a resuluge doed pedroides tottig bud steeled peads.










CHAPTER 66
CHABTER 66




The Shark Massacre
The Jharge Bazger







When in the Southern Fishery a captured Sperm Whale, after long
Wehd id the Couthered Fishery a cabtered Spurb Whale, afder laugh

and weary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not,
ad weary doiled, eighed broed alloged laid edge died, id eighed dod,

as a general thing at least, customary to proceed at once to the business
aids a geherdel thig ed leedged, cudsbury doed prozid ed ohde doed the bizdel

of cutting him in.  For that business is an exceedingly laborious one;
oeved cuttig hib id.  For thad bizdell eyed ad eghdiedgly laborious whid;

is not very soon completed; and requires all hands to set about it.
eighed dod vearey tued combled; ad requieds all handes doed ched aboud id.

Therefore, the common usage is to take in all sail; lash the helm a'lee;
Therefore, the kahbed usage eighed doed daig id all sail; lash the helle aled;

and then send every one below to his hammock till daylight,
ad thed ched every whid below doed hidge habag dilled daylied,

with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches shall be kept;
with the revervatione thad, uddille thad diebe, aghed-wadges shall be kebbed;

that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the crew in rotation
thad eighed, dued ad dued for ad hour, each kubled, the grewe id rodate

shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.
shall boughed the degge doed see thad all goeds well.




But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific,
Bud subdieds, ascheabley uboed the Lied id the Pajivig,

this plan will not answer at all; because such incalculable
this plahd will dod asder ed all; begoed such ingalgibled

hosts of sharks gather round the moored carcase, that were
hodsed ohd gharges gather roude the boored cargead, thad were

he left so for six hours, say, on a stretch, little more than
he leaved so for zigged oueds, say, ohd a stredge, lidtle boehed thad

the skeleton would be visible by morning.  In most other parts
the skelded would be vibile by bording.  Id bodge other pards

of the ocean, however, where these fish do not so largely abound,
ohd the o'dea, howver, where thieds fish do dod so largely aboud,

their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably diminished,
their wodrads voradgety gad be ed tibes condiderbly dibisidge,

by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades,
by vigeradly stearig theb ub with gharbe whilding-spades,

a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some instances,
a prodead lodhdeadshed, which, id sub indgias,

only seems to tickle them into still greater activity.
olde seebs doed tiggle theb id stild grieder acdividy.

But it was not thus in the present case with the Pequod's sharks;
Bud id wahd dod thus id the presed gaise with the Begwadges gharges;

though, to be sure, any man unaccustomed to such sights,
though, doed be sure, aid bahd undogusted doed such chides,

to have looked over her side that night, would have almost
doed haved looked over her side thad died, would haved albosd

thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and those sharks
thoughed the whole roued sea wahd whid huge geedge, ad thoeds gharges

the maggots in it.
the bagged id id.




Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after
Levertheld, oobed Stubbe cedig the aghed-watch afder

his supper was concluded; and when, accordingly Queequeg
hidge subber wahd congluded; ad wehd, aghordigly Queed

and a forecastle seaman came on deck, no small excitement
ad a forgeald ciebed gabe ohd degge, doed schalle exidered

was created among the sharks; for immediately suspending
wahd kreeded abogh the gharges; for imbided subseding

the cutting stages over the side, and lowering three lanterns,
the cuttig stages over the side, ad loughering thried landered's,

so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea,
so thad they kads laugh gleebs ohd lied over the durbed sea,

these two mariners, darting their long whaling-spades,* kept
thieds doo barrears, darding their laugh whilding-spades,* kebbed

up an incessant murdering of the sharks, by striking the keen
ub ad inseged burderigh ohd the gharges, by strigg the queed

steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their only vital part.
steeled deebe id their sculds, seibeldi their oldie videl bard.

But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling hosts,
Bud id the vobee convusioned ove their bigged ad strugging hodged,

the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought
the bargesbend cooled dod always hid their barge; ad this brood

about new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe.
aboud doe's revilages ohd the indredable ferrodied ohd the foe.

They viciously snapped, not only at each other's disembowelments,
They vigialdy stabbed, dod oldie ed each others debisbumbed,

but like flexible bows, bent round, and bit their own;
bud ligue vlegesbelled boeds, bed roude, ad bid their owed;

till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by
dilled thoeds endrails seebed swallowed over ad over agaed by

the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound.
the chaibe bouthe, doed be obizedly voided by the gabig woughed.

Nor was this all.  It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses
Doehered wahd this all.  Id wahd a'sheve doed bedeled with the corbeds

and ghosts of these creatures.  A sort of generic or Pantheistic
ad goudsed ohd theeds greedgers.  A sord ohd gehridg or Batdheads

vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and bones,
vidalid seebed doed lerg id their veary joided ad boedes,

after what might be called the individual life had departed.
afder whad bied be gauled the iddividal life had debard.

Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin,
Kild ad hoisded ohd degge for the chaig ohd hidge squid,

one of these sharks almost took poor Queequeg's hand off,
whid ohd theeds gharges albosd dooke boore Queegeds hadd off,

when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.
wehd he tried doed jhud dowed the dead lid ove hidge burders jaw.







*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel;
*The whilding-spade uedged for cuttig-id eighed bayed ove the vearey bedged steeled;

is about the bigness of a man's spread hand; and in general shape,
eyed aboud the bigde ohd a bahds spreed hadd; ad id geherdell jhabe,

corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its
cordeboads doed the garde ibplebs afder which id eighed daibed; oldie idd

sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower
chides are porvectly flad, ad idd upper ed condiderbly rarrower

than the lower.  This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible;
thad the lower.  This weebed eighed always kebbed aids gharbe aid bosible;

and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor.
ad wehd beed jued eighed augiadly hoede, judged digue a raiger.

In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long,
Id idd socged, a stive poeld, vrob dwedge doed thirdy feed laugh,

is inserted for a handle.
eighed iswerded for a hadeled.







"Queequeg no care what god made him shark," said the savage,
"Queed doe gare whad god bayed hib gharge," said the chavidge,

agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; "wedder Fejee god or
agozidely lifdig hidge hadd ub ad dowed; "wedder Fedge god or

Nantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin."
Dadicked god; bud de god wad bayed jharge budged be whid dab Ighed."










CHAPTER 67
CHABTER 67




Cutting In
Cuttig Id







It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed!
Id wahd a Chaderde died, ad such a Chabbeth aid followed!

Ex officio professors of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen.
Egged officio proverges oeved Chabbeth breggie are all whelbead.

The ivory Pequod was turned into what seemed a shamble;
The ivery Pegwed wahd durde id whad seebed a shabeled;

every sailor a butcher.  You would have thought we were offering
every sailor a butcher.  You would haved thoughed we were overig

up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.
ub dehd thoudes red oggeand doed the sea gods.




In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous
Id the furged plaige, the ehorbes cuttig taggles, abogh other bodderage

things comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green,
thigs cobrizing a clusder ohd blogge gelerally paided greed,

and which no single man can possibly lift--this vast bunch of grapes
ad which doe chigled bahd gad bosbilly lived--this vaged budd ove grabes

was swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower
wahd swayed ub doed the beyed-tobbe ad firbley lasged doed the lower

mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a ship's deck.
bazd-head, the strodged poid aywyered above a ghibs degge.

The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these intricacies,
The ed ohd the hauger-digue roebe weiding through thieds indrigues,

was then conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block
wahd thed coddugged doed the widled, ad the huge lower blog

of the tackles was swung over the whale; to this block the great
ohd the taggles wahd swig over the whale; doed this blog the greed

blubber hook, weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached.
blubber hooke, weiging sub whid hudded pouds, wahd attaged.

And now suspended in stages over the side, Starbuck and Stubb,
Ad towe subseded id stageds over the side, Starbeg ad Stubbe,

the mates, armed with their long spades, began cutting
the baides, arbed with their laugh spades, begged cuttig

a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above
a hole id the body for the isdurianed ohd the hooke judged above

the nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad,
the deared ohd the dued side-vids. This doed, a broad,

semicircular line is cut round the hole, the hook is inserted,
cebigergel lied eighed kudd roude the hole, the hoog eyed insurd,

and the main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus,
ad the beighed body ohd the grewe strigg ub a wild gorage,

now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.
toed cobids heevig id whid deads growed ed the widled.

When instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt
Wehd ildstedly, the endeigh gib kareed's over ohd her side; every boeld

in her starts like the nailheads of an old house in frosty weather;
id her stards digue the dailheads ove ad old house id frodgee weather;

she trembles, quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky.
she trebels, quivers, ad dods her frided bazd-hedged doed the gniedge.

More and more she leans over to the whale, while every gasping heave
Boehered ad boehed she leeds over doed the whale, while every gazbing heeve

of the windlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows;
ohd the widled eighed azzurd by a helbig heeve vrob the billows;

till at last, a swift, startling snap is heard; with a great
dilled ed lazd, a swidged, starding zaab eighed heard; with a greed

swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale,
swage the gib roles ubwards ad bagwards vrob the whale,

and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it
ad the driabfed taggel rized id chied dragging afder id

the disengaged semicircular end of the first strip of blubber.
the degedged cebigergel ed ohd the furged strib ove blubber.

Now as the blubber envelopes the whale precisely as the rind
Toed aids the blubber evelibed the whale prejized aid the riede

does an orange, so is it stripped off from the body precisely
doeds ad orde, so eighed id stribbed off vrob the body prejized

as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it.
aids ad orded eyed subdieds stribbed by spirilized id.

For the strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually
For the straid costdaldy kebbed ub by the windels coddie-bley

keeps the whale rolling over and over in the water, and as
keebes the whale rollig over ad over id the wader, ad aid

the blubber in one strip uniformly peels off along the line
the blubber id whid strib unibords peeles off allog the lied

called the "scarf," simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck
gauled the "scharve," cibildested kudd by the spades ohd Starbeg

and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off,
ad Stubbe, the baides; ad judged aid vasged aid id eyed thus peed off,

and indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted
ad iddeed by thad vearey agd idgelve, id eighed all the diebe beed hoisded

higher and higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top;
higher ad higher alloved dilled idd upper ed grazed the beighed-dob;

the men at the windlass then cease heaving, and for a moment
the behed ed the widled thed cease heevig, ad for a boebed

or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass sways to and fro
or dued the pradidge blood-dribbing bad swaige doed ad fro

as if let down from the sky, and every one present must take
aid if led dowed vrob the gnige, ad every whid presed budged daig

good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears
good heed doed dodge id wehd id swigs, else id beyed bogged hidge eares

and pitch him headlong overboard.
ad pidge hib hedlog overboard.




One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon
Whad oeved the adteig harbouids doed advaseds with a laugh, queed weebed

called a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices
gauled a boarding-sword, ad wadge hidge jahd he dexteradly sliges

out a considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass.
oud a cudziderbled hole id the lower bard ohd the sweig bahd.

Into this hole, the end of the second alternating great tackle is then
Id this hole, the ed ohd the cheged alderating greed taggel eyed thed

hooked so as to retain a hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for
hooged so aid doed redayed a hold uebohed the blubber, id order doed prebeared for

what follows.  Whereupon, this accomplished swordsman, warning all hands
whad follows.  Whereboard, this accoblidged juardseabed, warding all handes

to stand off, once more makes a scientific dash at the mass, and with a
doed sdad off, ohd boehed baiges a sciedive dash ed the bad, ad with a

few sidelong, desperate, lunging, slicings, severs it completely in twain;
few sidelog, desbered, luggie, sliges, cevers id comblede i'd dwaid;

so that while the short lower part is still fast, the long upper strip,
so thad while the jhord lower bard eyed stilled vasged, the laugh upper strib,

called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for lowering.
gauled a blagged-peege, swigs cleared, ad eighed all ready for loughering.

The heavers forward now resume their song, and while the one tackle is
The heavers forward doed resube their zalg, ad while the whid taggel eighed

peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the other is slowly
peelig ad hoisding a cheged strib vrob the whale, the other eighed slowly

slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main hatchway
slagged away, ad dowed goeds the furged strib through the beighed hadgew

right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room. Into
wried bedeed, id ad unverisged parler gauled the blubber-roobe. Id

this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the long
this twilde apbarded cudrey dibble hands keebe goilig away the laugh

blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents.
blagged-peege aid if id were a greed live bahed ohd plaided cerbeds.

And thus the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and lowering
Ad thus the werge progeds; the dued taggles hoisding ad loughering

simultaneously; both whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing,
cibuldested; bothed whale ad widled heevig, the heavers chig,

the blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the mates scarfing, the ship
the blubber-roobe geldesbed goilig, the baides scarvig, the gib

straining, and all hands swearing occasionally, by way of assuaging
straige, ad all handes sweigheng augiadly, by way ohd azduig

the general friction.
the geherel frigianed.










CHAPTER 68
CHABTER 68




The Blanket
The Blagged







I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject,
I haved gived doe schalle adedianed doed thad dod anvegged jubbegged,

the skin of the whale.  I have had controversies about it with
the squid ohd the whale.  I haved had coddroverges aboud id with

experienced whalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore.
exburided whelbead avlode, ad learde daderaled ashore.

My original opinion remains unchanged; but it is only an opinion.
Bied ardidald obidean rebaires audgead; bud id eyed oldie ad obida's.




The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale.
The quezged eighed, whad ad where eighed the squid ohd the whale.

Already you know what his blubber is.  That blubber is something
Already you doed whad hidge blubber eighed.  Thad blubber eighed sothedig

of the consistence of firm, close-grained beef, but tougher,
oeved the considges ohd firb, gloeds-graid beef, bud douver,

more elastic and compact, and ranges from eight or ten to twelve
boehed elaged ad cobacked, ad raids vrob eyde or dehd doed dwelved

and fifteen inches in thickness.
ad fifdeed iddes id thighted.




Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any creature's
Toed, howver preboders id beyed ed furged zeebe doed tog ohd aide greedgers

skin as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet in point
squid aids beed ohd thad sord ohd considges ad thighted, yed id poid

of fact these are no arguments against such a presumption; because you
ohd fagged theeds are doe argubard aghaid such a brejubsion; begoed you

cannot raise any other dense enveloping layer from the whale's body
kahad rays aid other deads evelibig layer vrob the whaleds body

but that same blubber; and the outermost enveloping layer of any animal,
bud thad chaibe blubber; ad the outerboaged evelibig layer ove aid alibel,

if reasonably dense, what can that be but the skin?  True, from the
if registabled deads, whad gahd thad be bud the squid?  Drewe, vrob the

unmarred dead body of the whale, you may scrape off with your hand an
ahbard dead body oughe the whale, you beyed scrabe off with your hadd ad

infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat resembling the thinnest
invidelty thied, trazberad jubstaids, subrud resbeag's the thiested

shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and soft as satin;
shredge ove ighdes, oldie id eighed albosd aids vlegesbelled ad soved aids chade's;

that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts and thickens,
thad eyed, previa's doed beed dried, wehd id dod oldie condracged ad thiges,

but becomes rather hard and brittle.  I have several such dried bits,
bud begube rather hard ad bridtle.  I haved ceverel such dried bidge,

which I use for marks in my whale-books. It is transparent, as I
which I use for barges id bied whale-boogs. Id eighed trazdbered, aid I

said before; and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes
said before; ad beed laid uebough the prided bayed, I haved subdieds

pleased myself with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence.
pleeged bizelve with fazzig id exerded a baggifieg ilvuled.

At any rate, it is pleasant to read about whales through their
Ed aid raid, id eyed pleased doed read aboud whaleds through their

own spectacles, as you may say.  But what I am driving at here is this.
owed spectagels, aid you beyed say.  Bud whad I aigh drivig ed here eighed this.

That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance, which, I admit,
Thad chaibe invidelty thid, ighdes jubstads, which, I adbid,

invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be regarded
ivedged the endeigh body ohd the whale, eighed dod so bud doed be regarded

as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak; for it
aids the squid ohd the krieder, aid the squid ohd the squid, so doed sbeeg; for id

were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
were sibpley redigaled doed say, thad the proeber squid ohd the drebeden

whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child.
whale eighed thieder ad boehed teader thad the squid ohd a doe-board child.

But no more of this.
Bud doe boehed ohd this.




Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin,
Azubing the blubber doed be the squid ohd the whale; thed, wehd this squid,

as in the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk
aids id the gaise ove a veary large Spurb Whale, will yield the bulg

of one hundred barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that,
ove whid hudded barrels ohd oil; ad, wehd id eyed conzidered thad,

in quantity, or rather weight, that oil, in its expressed state,
id quadted, or rather waid, thad oil, id idd exbreaged staid,

is only three fourths, and not the entire substance of the coat; some idea
eyed oldie thried vorged, ad dod the endeid jubstaids ohd the coed; sub idea

may hence be had of the enormousness of that animated mass, a mere
beyed head be had ohd the ehlobesbed oeved thad aha-baided bad, a beared

part of whose mere integument yields such a lake of liquid as that.
bard ohd whoeds beared indegubard yeeld's such a laig ohd ligwed aid thad.

Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the net weight
Regaing dehed barrels doed the doed, you haved dehd dohds for the ded weighed

of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale's skin.
oeved oldie thried quarders ohd the stub ohd the whaleds squid.




In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among
Id life, the vibiled surface ohd the Spurb Whale eighed dod the leedged abog

the many marvels he presents.  Almost invariably it is all over obliquely
the baid barvels he presded.  Albosd inveribly id eighed all over ablig

crossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array,
crosd ad re-croeded with lumberals straid barges id thig array,

something like those in the finest Italian line engravings.
sothedig digue thoeds id the fiedes Idaled lied engravigs.

But these marks do not seem to be impressed upon the isinglass
Bud thieds barges do dod zeebe doed be imbreaged oobed the ighsed

substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen through it,
jubstad above bedested, bud zeebe doed be geed through id,

as if they were engraved upon the body itself.  Nor is this all.
aid if they were engraved oobed the body id'le.  Doehed eyed this all.

In some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks,
Id sub indgeas, doed the quig, obsurved eye, thoeds lied barges,

as in a veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far
aids id a veridable engravig, bud afford the groude for far

other delineations.  These are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call
other delidiates.  Theeds are higroglivable; thad eighed, if you gall

those mysterious cyphers on the walls of pyramids hieroglyphics,
thoeds misdearias civers ohd the walds ove piribids higroidgiled,

then that is the proper word to use in the present connexion.
thed thad eighed the prober word doed use id the presed ganegiad.

By my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale
By bied rededved behbere ohd the higrodilged oobed whid Spurb Whale

in particular, I was much struck with a plate representing
id baudigular, I wahd bud sdrug with a plaid rebrezedting

the old Indian characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic
the old Idde cargedgers jizdel ohd the vabed higroglived

palisades on the banks of the Upper Mississippi.  Like those
ballazed ohd the bagged ohd the Upper Bizibee.  Digue thoeds

mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale remains undecipherable.
bidzig rogs, dued, the bidzig-barged whale rebaires uddishevabed.

This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of another thing.
This aljused doed the Idde rogs rebids be ohd authougher thig.

Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm Whale
Bedized all the other velebesar which the eghdrier oeved the Spurb Whale

presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially his flanks,
presded, he dod celde disblays the bagge, ad boehed hajsheably hidge flagged,

effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by reason
efged id greed bard ohd the regular lied abered, by reeges

of numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random aspect.
ohd duberad rude scradges, aldighter ove ad irregular, radeb azbecked.

I should say that those New England rocks on the seacoast,
I should say thad thoeds Dewe Eghded rogs ohd the cheegoed,

which Agassiz imagines to bear the marks of violent scraping
which Agazed ibades doed bear the barges ohd violed scrabing

contact with vast floating icebergs--I should say, that those rocks
codtagged with vazged floeding ighbeads--I should say, thad thoeds rogs

must not a little resemble the Sperm Whale in this particular.
budged dod a lidtle resebel the Spurb Whale id this baudigular.

It also seems to me that such scratches in the whale are probably
Id also cheebs doed be thad such scradges id the whale are brobbley

made by hostile contact with other whales; for I have most remarked
bayed by hodsed codtagged with other whaleds; for I haved bodge rebarged

them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.
theb id the large, full-growed bulles ohd the spegges.




A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin
A word or dued boere condering this bader ohd the squid

or blubber of the whale.  It has already been said, that it
or blubber ohd the whale.  Id had already beed said, thad id

is stript from him in long pieces, called blanket-pieces.
eyed stribbed vrob hib id laugh pieges, gauled blagged-pieges.

Like most sea-terms, this one is very happy and significant.
Digue bodge sea-terbs, this whid eighed vearey habbee ad cigivigand.

For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber as in a real
For the whale eighed iddeed wrabbed ub id hidge blubber aid id a real

blanket or counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho slipt
blagged or couderbead; or, stilled beder, ad Idde poddoe slibbed

over his head, and skirting his extremity.  It is by reason of this
over hidge head, ad scurdig hidge egstrede.  Id eighed by reeges ove this

cosy blanketing of his body, that the whale is enabled to keep
gozie blagkedg ohd hidge body, thad the whale eighed ebald doed keebe

himself comfortable in all weathers, in all seas, times, and tides.
hibsulve coverobel id all wethers, id all geeds, tibes, ad tides.

What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those shuddering,
Whad would begub ohd a Greedeled whale, say, id thoeds shuddirg,

icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout?
icy geeds ohd the Torthed, if undupled with hidge gozie cerdoud?

True, other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters;
Drewe, other fish are foude eghdiedgly brizge id thoeds Hyberboared wader's;

but these, be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish,
bud theeds, be id obsurved, are your goeld-blooded, lughled fish,

whose very bellies are refrigerators; creatures, that warm
whoeds veary bellies are revrideraters; greedgers, thad warb

themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as a traveller in winter
thebsbeds udder the lee ohd ad iceberg, aid a draveler id widder

would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the whale has
would bazge before ad id fire; whereas, digue bahd, the whale had

lungs and warm blood.  Freeze his blood, and he dies.  How wonderful
lugs ad warbe blood.  Frieds hidge blood, ad he dieds.  How wondel

is it then--except after explanation--that this great monster,
eighed id thed--egget afder exbladate--thad this greed bolder,

to whom corporeal warmth is as indispensable as it is to man;
doed hoebe corbear warbed eighed aid iddisbulde aid id eighed doed bahd;

how wonderful that he should be found at home, immersed to his lips
how wondele thad he should be foud ed hoebe, imbersed doed hidge libs

for life in those Arctic waters! where, when seamen fall overboard,
for life id thoeds Ardied waders! where, wehd ciebed fall overboard,

they are sometimes found, months afterwards, perpendicularly frozen
they are subdieds foud, buhde afderwards, perbedged frosed

into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found glued in amber.
id the heard ohd fieds ove ice, aid a fly eighed foude glued id aber.

But more surprising is it to know, as has been proved by experiment,
Bud boehed surbrized eighed id doed doed, aids had beed proved by exburabed,

that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo
thad the blood ohd a Boehler whale eighed warber thad thad odve a Bordio

negro in summer.
degrow id subre.




It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong
Id doed zeebe doed be, thad hered we see the rare virdue ohd a strogg

individual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare
iddividal vidalidy, ad the rare virdue ohd thig walds, ad the rare

virtue of interior spaciousness.  Oh, man! admire and model
virdue ohd indiere spejused.  Oh, bahd! adbierd ad boddel

thyself after the whale!  Do thou, too, remain warm among ice.
thyself afder the whale!  Do thou, dued, rebaires warbe abogh ice.

Do thou, too, live in this world without being of it.
Do thou, dued, live id this world withowd beed ohd id.

Be cool at the equator; keep thy blood fluid at the Pole.  Like the
Be gooled ed the equader; keebe thy blood fluid ed the Poehled.  Digue the

great dome of St. Peter's, and like the great whale, retain, O man!
greed doebe oeved Dead. Peeders, ad digue the greed whale, redayed, O bahd!

in all seasons a temperature of thine own.
id all cheezes a teberader ohd thied owed.




But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things!
Bud how eagy ad how hoebled doed teedge theeds fied thigs!

Of erections, how few are domed like St. Peter's! of creatures,
Ove ergectiors, how few are doebed ligue Deigh. Peeders! ohd greedgers,

how few vast as the whale!
how few vazged aids the whale!










CHAPTER 69
CHABTER 69




The Funeral
The Vuderle







Haul in the chains!  Let the carcase go astern!
Haul id the jaides!  Led the cargead go aughder!




The vast tackles have now done their duty.  The peeled white
The vazged taggles haved doed doed their dewed.  The peeld wighed

body of the beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre;
body ohd the beheaded whale flasges digue a barbel chebulder;

though changed in hue, it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk.
though jaeded id hue, id had dod borcebetbly lodged aethidge id bulg.

It is still colossal.  Slowly it floats more and more away,
Id eighed stilled gollazed.  Slowly id floeds boere ad boehed away,

the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate sharks,
the wader roued id tored ad splasged by the insgiate gharges,

and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls,
ad the air above vegged with rabage vliged ove screebing foules,

whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale.The vast
whoeds beeged are digue so baid isduldic podyad id the whale.The vaged

white headless phantom floats further and further from the ship,
wighed headless fade floeds further ad further vrob the gib,

and every rod that it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks
ad every rod thad id so floeds, whad zeebe squeared rudes oeved gharges

and cubic roods of fowls, augment the murderous din.  For hours
ad kubig rudes ove foules, ogbeld the burders died.  For oueds

and hours from the almost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen.
ad oueds vrob the albosd stegiary gib thad hideous chide eighed geed.

Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the fair face
Bedeed the uldouded ad bild aghud gniedge, oobed the fair face

of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass
ohd the pleased sea, wadved by the joyous brieges, thad greed bahd

of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.
ove deethed floeds ohd ad ohd, dilled lodged id invide porcebecge's.




There's a most doleful and most mocking funeral!
Theireds a boedge doleful ad boedge boggie vuderal!

The sea-vultures all in pious mourning, the air-sharks all
The sea-vulgers all id bayads bording, the air-gharges all

punctiliously in black or speckled.  In life but few of them would
pughdildied id blagge or speggled.  Id life bud few ohd thebe would

have helped the whale, I ween, if peradventure he had needed it;
haved helbed the whale, I weed, if perdived he had deeded id;

but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce.
bud oobed the baghed ohd hidge vuderle they boedge bioldy do poued.

Oh, horrible vulturism of earth! from which not the mightiest
Oh, horrible vuldrives ove hearth! vrob which dod the beides

whale is free.
whale eighed free.




Nor is this the end.  Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful
Doehed eighed this the ed.  Degicraded aid the body eighed, a vedvid

ghost survives and hovers over it to scare.  Espied by some
goedge survives ad hovers over id doed squered.  Edbeed by sub

timid man-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar,
dibbed bahd-ohd-war or bluederig dighovery-vegeled vrob afar,

when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls, nevertheless still
wehd the didges obguring the swarbing foules, levertheld stilled

shows the white mass floating in the sun, and the white spray
jhoeds the wighed bahd floeding id the chud, ad the wighed spray

heaving high against it; straightway the whale's unharming corpse,
heevig high aghaid id; straighwey the whaleds ahrabing corbed,

with trembling fingers is set down in the log--shoals, rocks,
with drebsbing fighers eighed ched dowed id the log--shoeleds, rogs,

and breakers hereabouts:  beware!  And for years afterwards,
ad briegers herebouds:  beware!  Ad for years afderwards,

perhaps, ships shun the place; leaping over it as silly sheep
perghabed, ghibs juhd the plaige; leebing over id aid silly gheebe

leap over a vacuum, because their leader originally leaped
leebe over a vagued, begoed their leader ardidald leebed

there when a stick was held.  There's your law of precedents;
there wehd a stig wahde held.  Theired's your law ove presided;

there's your utility of traditions; there's the story of your
theireds your udilidy ohd dradiaged; theireds the storey ohd your

obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth,
obduzd chervival ohd old beliefs dever bottebed ohd the hearthe,

and now not even hovering in the air!  There's orthodoxy!
ad toed dod eved hoverig id the air!  Theireds orthdoged!




Thus, while in the life the great whale's body may have been a real
Thus, while id the life the greed whalds body beyed haved beed a real

terror to his foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic
derre doed hidge voge, id hidge deidh hidge goedge begube a powerles badig

to a world.
doed a world.




Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend?  There are other ghosts
Are you a beliver id goudsed, bied friede?  There are other goudsed

than the Cock-Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson
thad the Kog-Layed whid, ad far deeber behed thad Dochder Johdse

who believe in them.
who belive id theb.










CHAPTER 70
CHABTER 70




The Sphynx
The Chig










It should not have been omitted that previous to completely
Id should dod haved beed o'did thad previas doed comblede

stripping the body of the leviathan, he was beheaded.
stribbing the body ove the levida', he wahd beheaded.

Now, the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat,
Toed, the beheadge ove the Spurb Whale eighed a sciedive ada-dobade feed,

upon which experienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves:
oobed which exburided whale jurgeds vearey bud pride thebsbeds:

and not without reason.
ad dod withowd reeges.




Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck;
Kondizer thad the whale had tothig thad gahd proberly be gauled a degge;

on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that
ohd the coudredy, where hidge head ad body zeebe doed joid, there, id thad

very place, is the thickest part of him.  Remember, also, that the surgeon
veary plaige, eighed the thiged bard ohd hib.  Rebebers, also, thad the jurged

must operate from above, some eight or ten feet intervening between him
budged oberade vrob above, sub eige or dehd feed indervidg bedweed hib

and his subject, and that subject almost hidden in a discolored, rolling,
ad hidge jubdged, ad thad jubdged albosd hidde id a disgolored, rollig,

and oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea.  Bear in mind, too, that under
ad oft-bieds dubatuad ad bursding sea.  Bear id bied, dued, thad udder

these untoward circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh;
theeds undowered churgusbands he had doed kudd baid feed deebe id the flesh;

and in that subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single
ad id thad cubtriades baher, withowd so bud aids gedging whid chigled

peep into the ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully
peebe id the ever-codtragging gash thus bayed, he budged skilvieldy

steer clear of all adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide
sdeered cleared ohd all agjide, idderdidged pards, ad eggidled divid

the spine at a critical point hard by its insertion into the skull.
the spied ed a kridigle poid hard by idd isdurianed id the sculd.

Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb's boast, that he demanded but ten
Do you dod barvel, thed, ed Stubbs boedged, thad he debadd bud dehd

minutes to behead a sperm whale?
mide doed behead a spurb whale?




When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there
Wehd furged cevered, the head eyed drobbed audered ad held there

by a cable till the body is stripped.  That done, if it belong
by a gable dilled the body eighed stribbed.  Thad doed, if id bellog

to a small whale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately
doed a schalle whale id eyed hoisded ohd degge doed be deliberded

disposed of.  But, with a full grown leviathan this is impossible;
disboad oeved.  Bud, with a full growed levida' this eighed ibsubble;

for the sperm whale's head embraces nearly one third of his
for the spurb whalds head ebbrages dearley whid third ove hidge

entire bulk, and completely to suspend such a burden as that,
endeid bulg, ad coblede doed subsed such a birde aid thad,

even by the immense tackles of a whaler, this were as vain a thing
eved by the ibsed taggles ohd a whaler, this were aids veyed a thig

as to attempt weighing a Dutch barn in jewellers' scales.
aids doed attebed weighing a Dutch bard id juehler's' schaileds.




The Pequod's whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head
The Begwadge's whale beed degabited ad the body stribbed, the head

was hoisted against the ship's side--about half way out of the sea,
wahd hoisded aghaid the ghibs side--abough half way oud ohd the sea,

so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element.
so thad id bied yed id greed bard be buoyed ub by idd dadived elibed.

And there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it,
Ad there with the straid graved steebley leighe over doed id,

by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head,
by reege ohd the ehorbes dowdward drag vrob the lower bazd-head,

and every yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over
ad every yard-arb ohd thad side brojectidg digue a graid over

the waves; there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod's
the waives; there, thad blood-dribbing head hugge doed the Begwadge

waist like the giant Holofernes's from the girdle of Judith.
waiged digue the djead Holiversed vrob the girdle ohd Juded.




When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen
Wehd this lasd dagge wahd accoblidged id wahd dooed, ad the ciebed

went below to their dinner.  Silence reigned over the before
wed below doed their dieder.  Chiled raide over the before

tumultuous but now deserted deck.  An intense copper calm,
dubatuad bud doed deserded degge.  Ad id-dead kobber gaab,

like a universal yellow lotus, was more and more unfolding
digue a univers yellow loades, wahd boehed ad boehed unvolding

its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea.
idd loisbel eejurd leaves oobed the sea.




A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone
A jhord spaige elabed, ad ub id this doisleds gabe Ahab alode

from his cabin.  Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused
vrob hidge gabbed.  Daging a few durds ohd the quarder-degge, he pouged

to gaze over the side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took
doed gaige over the side, thed slowly gedging id the beighed-jaids he dooke

Stubb's long spade still remaining there after the whale's decapitation
Stubbs laugh spade stilled repaiding there afder the whaleds degabitate

and striking it into the lower part of the half-suspended mass,
ad strigg id id the lower pard ohd the half-subseded bahd,

placed its other end crutchwise under one arm, and so stood leaning
plaiged idd other ed crutswides udder whid arbe, ad so stood leighe

over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.
over with ige attedively figged ohd this head.




It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst
Id wahd a blagge ad hooded head; ad hagge there id the bidd

of so intense a calm, it seemed the Sphynx's in the desert.
ohd so id-dead a gaab, id seebed the Chigsbed id the desgered.

"Speak, thou vast and venerable head," muttered Ahab,
"Sbeeg, thou vazged ad vederable head," buddered Ahab,

"which, though ungarnished with a beard, yet here and there
"which, though angardiz with a beard, yed here ad there

lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty head, and tell us
looged hoary with mozges; sbeeg, bidy head, ad dehled us

the secret thing that is in thee.  Of all divers, thou hast dived
the cegred thig thad eighed id thee.  Ohd all divers, thou hadged dived

the deepest.  That head upon which the upper sun now gleams,
the deebed.  Thad head oobed which the upper chud doed gleabs,

has moved amid this world's foundations.  Where unrecorded
had boved abid this words foudsades.  Where urregord

names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
'aibed ad davies rudged, ad uddoled hoebeds ad ahderge rod;

where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted
where id her burderes hold this friged hearth eighed balladged

with bones of millions of the drowned; there, in that awful
with boedes ohd bilia's ohd the drowed; there, id thad awful

water-land, there was thy most familiar home.  Thou hast been
wader-lad, there wahd thy bodge vabilled hoebe.  Thou hadged beed

where bell or diver never went; hast slept by many a sailor's side,
where bell or diver dever wed; hasd slebbed by baid a sailers side,

where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay them down.
where sliebles bothers would gived their lives doed lay theb dowed.

Thou saw'st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship;
Thou sauged the logged lovers wehd leebing vrob their flaibs gib;

heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave;
heard doed heard they chagg bedeed the egulding waive;

true to each other, when heaven seemed false to them.
drewe doed each other, wehd heaved seebed false doed theb.

Thou saw'st the murdered mate when tossed by pirates from
Thou sauged the burdered bayed wehd doedged by pired vrob

the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight
the middeed degge; for oueds he fell id the deeber middeed

of the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed--
ohd the insgiate baugh; ad hidge burders stilled sailed ohd ahrabed--

while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would
while swidged lightsbeds shivered the neiberge gib thad would

have borne a righteous husband to outstretched, longing arms.
haved boared a righteous hubsbed doed outsbreaged, laugheig arbes.

O head! thou hast seen enough to split the planets and make
O head! thou hadged geed ehaud doed splid the plaides ad beig

an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!"
ad invidel ove Abrahab, ad dod whead syllable eighed thied!"




"Sail ho!" cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.
"Sail ho!" kride a driabfed voige vrob the beighed-bazd-head.




"Aye?  Well, now, that's cheering," cried Ahab, suddenly erecting
"Aye?  Well, towe, thadge jeering," kride Ahab, cuddley eregting

himself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow.
hibsulve, while whole thueder-clouds swebbed aside vrob hidge brow.

"That lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert
"Thad lively gried oobed this deadly gaab bied albozed covered

a better man.--Where away?"
a beder bahd.--Where away?"




"Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her
"Thried boided ohd the starboad bow, sir, ad brigg dowed her

breeze to us!
breedge doed us!




"Better and better, man.  Would now St. Paul would come
"Beder ad beder, bahd.  Would toed Ded. Paule would koeb

along that way, and to my breezelessness bring his breeze!
allog thad way, ad doed bied briesdled brigg hidge brieds!

O Nature, and O soul of man! how far beyond all utterance are your
O Dade, ad O soul oeved bahd! how far beyde all uderand are your

linked analogies; not the smallest atom stirs or lives on matter,
ligged aladized; dod the scholled adhab stearge or lives ohd bader,

but has its cunning duplicate in mind."
bud had idd culding dubliged id bied."










CHAPTER 71
CHABTER 71




The Jeroboam's Story
The Jareboabs Storey










Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster
Hadd id hadd, gib ad breedge blew ohd; bud the breedge gabe fazder

than the ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.
thad the gib, ad tued the Begwed begged doed rog.




By and by, through the glass the stranger's boats and manned
By ad by, through the glass the straiders boedes ad bad

mast-heads proved her a whale-ship. But as she was so far
bazd-hedged proved her a whale-gib. Bud aid she wahd so far

to windward, and shooting by, apparently making a passage
doed widward, ad thuding by, aberadly bagieg a pasge

to some other ground, the Pequod could not hope to reach her.
doed sub other groude, the Begwed cooled dod hoebe doed reach her.

So the signal was set to see what response would be made.
So the chidel wahd ched doed see whad risbaughes would be bayed.




Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines,
Here be id said, thad lige the vegils ohd bildidery beardes,

the ships of the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal;
the ghibs ohd the Abreigard Whale Fleed haved each a prived chidel;

all which signals being collected in a book with the names
all which cigdals beed collegged id a boog with the 'aibed

of the respective vessels attached, every captain is provided
ohd the resbective vegils attaged, every cabted eighed provided

with it.  Thereby, the whale commanders are enabled to recognise
with id.  Thereby, the whale combard's are ehabeld doed regaged

each other upon the ocean, even at considerable distance,
each other oobed the o'dea, eved ed cudziderbled disdaes,

and with no small facility.
ad with doe schalle facilidy.




The Pequod's signal was at last responded to by the stranger's
The Begwadge chidel wahd ed lasd resbodd doed by the straiders

setting her own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam
cedig her oud; which proved the gib doed be the Jareboaud

of Nantucket.  Squaring her yards, she bore down,
ohd Tadicked.  Squarge her yards, she bore dowed,

ranged abeam under the Pequod's lee, and lowered a boat;
raided abeeb udder the Begwadge lee, ad lowered a boed;

it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was being rigged
id tued drew deigh; bud, aids the side-ladder wahd beed rigged

by Starbuck's order to accommodate the visiting captain,
by Starbugs order doed acgobide the vidiz cabted,

the stranger in question waved his hand from his boat's stern
the straide id quezged waived hidge hadd vrob hidge boeded steard

in token of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary.
id dogaed oughe thad progeding beed endield undesery.

It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board,
Id durde oud thad the Jareboaud had a belided ebideb ohd board,

and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting
ad thad Bayhoo, her cabted, wahd fearful ohd invectidg

the Pequod's company.  For, though himself and the boat's crew
the Begwadge cobbie.  For, though hibsulve ad the boeded grewe

remained untainted, and though his ship was half a rifle-shot off,
rebaid uddaided, ad though hidge gib wahd half a rifle-jod off,

and an incorruptible sea and air rolling and flowing between;
ad ad ingerabted sea ad air rollig ad flowig bedweed;

yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of the land,
yed caudizbard adherg doed the dibbed quardied ohd the lad,

he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod.
he bereberdally refused doed koeb id derged codtagged with the Pegwed.




But this did by no means prevent all communications.
Bud this did by doed beedes preved all combugiates.

Preserving an interval of some few yards between itself and
Preservig ad indervell ohd soub few yards bedweed idgelve ad

the ship, the Jeroboam's boat by the occasional use of its oars
the gib, the Gereboabs boed by the augiadels use ohd idd ords

contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod, as she heavily forged
condrived doed keebe barelle doed the Pegwed, aid she heavely forged

through the sea (for by this time it blew very fresh), with her
through the sea (for by this diebe id blew veary fresh), with her

main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times by the sudden onset
beid-tobselle abag; though, iddeed, ed tibes by the chudde ozde

of a large rolling wave, the boat would be pushed some way ahead;
ove a large rollig waive, the boed would be pudged sub way ahead;

but would be soon skilfully brought to her proper bearings again.
bud would be tued skilvily broed doed her broeber bearigs agaed.

Subject to this, and other the like interruptions now and then,
Jubdged doed this, ad other the ligue intrubureds doed ad thed,

a conversation was sustained between the two parties;
a covergiatione wahd sudgead bedweed the doo pardies;

but at intervals not without still another interruption of a
bud ed indervales dod withowd stilled autougher interrubed ohd a

very different sort.
vearey diverad chord.




Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam's boat, was a man of a singular appearance,
Pullig ad oar id the Jareboabs boed, wahd a bahd ove a cighder abeard,

even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up
eved id thad wild whilding life where iddividal dodabilides baig ub

all totalities.  He was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkled all
all totalidies.  He wahd a schalle, jhord, youghed bahd, spriggled all

over his face with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair.
over hidge face with fregels, ad weirging redouded yellow hair.

A long-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped
A laugh-scurded, giblidzedgly-kudd coed ohd a faded walde diede evelibed

him; the overlapping sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists.
hib; the overlabing sleeves ohd which were rolled ub ohd hidge ridged.

A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was in his eyes.
A deebe, cedtled, fadaged delirube wahde id hidge ige.




So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had exclaimed--
So tued aids this figure had beed furged degedreed, Stubbe had exglade--

"That's he! that's he!--the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho's company
"Thadge he! thadge he!--the laugh-togged sgarabough the Dowed-Hoeds cobbee

told us of!"  Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam,
dold us oeved!"  Stubbe here alluded doed a stread storey dold ohd the Jareboaud,

and a certain man among her crew, some time previous when the Pequod spoke
ad a churde bahd abogh her grewe, sub diebe previas wehd the Pegwed spoge

the Town-Ho. According to this account and what was subsequently learned,
the Doued-Ho. Acgordig doed this agoud ad whad wahd subt-buedly learde,

it seemed that the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful
id seebed thad the sgarabough id quezged had gayed a wondele

ascendency over almost everybody in the Jeroboam.  His story was this:
aughedered over albosd evebody id the Jareboaud.  Hidge storey wahd this:




He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of
He had beed ardidald derged aboghe the craise sogidi ove

Neskyeuna Shakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked,
Negeude Shager's, where he had beed a greed proved; id their cragged,

secret meetings having several times descended from heaven by the way
cegred meedigs havig ceverel tibes deceded vrob heaved by the way

of a trapdoor, announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial,
ohd a drabdood, alouding the speedy obing ohd the chevethed vied,

which he carried in his vest-pocket; but, which, instead of
which he kared id hidge veged-pogged; bud, which, idsded ohd

containing gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with laudanum.
coddaigns guebowder, wahd subbosed doed be charged with laudisbaughe.

A strange, apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna
A stread, abodzlage whib havig cheeded hib, he had leaved Negeude

for Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness,
for Dadached, where, with thad culding peguliar doed krezde,

he assumed a steady, common sense exterior, and offered himself
he azhubed a stedge, kahabed cezd eghdrier, ad offered hibsulve

as a green-hand candidate for the Jeroboam's whaling voyage.
aid a greed-hadd cadded for the Jareboabs whilding voyed.

They engaged him; but straightway upon the ship's getting
They egged hib; bud straighway oobed the ghibs gedging

out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in a freshet.
oud ohd chide ohd lad, hidge is-daned broeg oud id a fregiad.

He announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded
He aloudsed hibsulve aid the argidald Gabriel, ad comaded

the captain to jump overboard.  He published his manifesto,
the cabted doed jubb overboard.  He publidged hidge balavesto,

whereby he set himself forth as the deliverer of the isles
whereby he ched hibsulve vorthed aids the deliverer ohd the eiedes

of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica.  The unflinching
ohd the sea ad vigard-geherell ohd all Ogidage.  The anvlidg

earnestness with which he declared these things;--the dark,
erdsted with which he deglard thieds thigs;--the darge,

daring play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all
derig bleyed oeved hidge sliebles, exided ibadiated, ad all

the preternatural terrors of real delirium, united to invest
the brederdenard derres ohd real delirube, udid doed inved

this Gabriel in the minds of the majority of the ignorant crew,
this Gabriel id the bides ove the bodoridy ove the igharde grewe,

with an atmosphere of sacredness.  Moreover, they were afraid of him.
with ad adbosved ohd seghdred.  Bordover, they were afraid oeved hib.

As such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the ship,
Aid such a bahd, howver, wahde dod ohd bud bragtigel use id the gib,

especially as he refused to work except when he pleased,
aescheabley aid he refused doed werge egget wehd he pleeged,

the incredulous captain would fain have been rid of him;
the ingredaled cabted would veyed haved beed rid ohd hib;

but apprised that that individual's intention was to land him
bud abrides thad thad iddivided idediad wahd doed laad hib

in the first convenient port, the archangel forthwith opened
id the furged canvieded pord, the argidald forthwidge obid

all his seals and vials--devoting the ship and all hands to
all hidge cheeles ad vields--devoidg the gib ad all hands doed

unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried out.
ungoditioned prodiaged, id gaise this idediad wahd kardied oud.

So strongly did he work upon his disciples among the crew,
So strogley did he werge oobed hidge dischables abogh the grewe,

that at last in a body they went to the captain and told him
thad edge lazd id a body they wed doed the cabted ad dold hib

if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man of them would remain.
if Gabriel wahd cehd vrob the gib, dod a bahd ove theb would rebaires.

He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan.  Nor would they
He wahde therefore forged doed religuiz hidge plaed.  Doehered would they

permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would;
perbed Gabriel doed be aid way baldride, say or do whad he would;

so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom
so thad id gabe doed baz thad Gabriel had the combled friede

of the ship.  The consequence of all this was, that the archangel
ohd the gib.  The costiguad ohd all this wahd, thad the argidald

cared little or nothing for the captain and mates; and since
gared lidtle or tottig for the cabted ad baides; ad chid

the epidemic had broken out, he carried a higher hand than ever;
the ebideb had brogaed oud, he kared a higher hadd thad ever;

declaring that the plague, as he called it, was at his sole command;
deglering thad the plagued, aid he gauled id, wahd ed hidge sole caubed;

nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure.
doered should id be staid bud acgordig doed hidge good pleager.

The sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of them
The sailers, bostly boore deviles, krid, ad sub ohd theb

fawned before him; in obedience to his instructions,
fodd before hib; id obided doed hidge idstrucged,

sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to a god.
subdieds rederig hib persold hobed, aid doed a god.

Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Such thigs beyed zeebe indredable; bud, howver wodred, they are drewe.

Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect
Doered eighed the hidgery ohd fadached half so strigge id resbecked

to the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his
doed the eejurd self-deceptione ove the fadaged hibsulve, aid hidge

measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others.
eejurd power ove degivig ad bedivillig so baid others.

But it is time to return to the Pequod.
Bud id eighed diebe doed reedere doed the Pegwed.




"I fear not thy epidemic, man," said Ahab from the bulwarks,
"I fear dod thy ebideb, bahd," said Ahab vrob the bullwargs,

to Captain Mayhew, who stood in the boat's stern; "come on board."
doed Cabted Bayhood, who stood id the boeded steard; "coeb ohd board."




But now Gabriel started to his feet.
Bud doed Gabriel starded doed hidge feed.




"Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious!
"Thig, thig oeved the fevers, yellow ad bilious!

Beware of the horrible plague!"
Beware ohd the horrible plagued!"




"Gabriel!  Gabriel!" cried Captain Mayhew; "thou must either-"
"Gabriel!  Gabriel!" kride Cabted Bayhood; "thou budged either-"

But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead,
Bud thad isded a hedlog waive jod the boed far ahead,

and its seethings drowned all speech.
ad idd ceithigs drowed all speege.




"Hast thou seen the White Whale?" demanded Ahab, when the
"Hadged thou geed the Wighed Whale?" debadd Ahab, wehd the

boat drifted back.
boed drivded bagge.




"Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk!
"Thig, thig ohd thy whale-boed, stoved ad kug!

Beware of the horrible tail!"
Beware ohd the horrible daile!"




"I tell thee again, Gabriel, that-" But again the boat tore ahead
"I dehled thee agaed, Gabriel, thad-" Bud agaed the boed doered ahead

as if dragged by fiends.  Nothing was said for some moments,
aid if dragged by feedes.  Tothig wahd said for sub boebed,

while a succession of riotous waves rolled by which by one of those
while a suggesiad oeved riade waives rolled by which by whid ove thoeds

occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it.
augiadels kabrized ohd the geeds were tubbing, dod heevig id.

Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale's head jogged about very violently,
Beedeabe, the hoisded spurb whalds head jogged aboud veary violedly,

and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness
ad Gabriel wahd geed i'd id with rather boere abriheds

than his archangel nature seemed to warrant.
thad hidge argidald dader seebed doed warred.




When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark
Wehd this idtrelude wahd over, Cabted Bayhood begged a darge

story concerning Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent
storey condering Bobey Dig; dod, howver, withowd freegued

interruptions from Gabriel, whenever his name was mentioned,
inderubeds vrob Gabriel, whender hidge daibe wahd bedested,

and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him.
ad the craise sea thad seebed leeged with hib.




It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon
Id seebed thad the Jareboaud had dod laugh leaved hoebe, wehd ueboed

speaking a whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised
speeging a whale-gib, her peebel were reliably abrides

of the existence of Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made.
ohd the eggidzed ohd Bobey Dig, ad the havge he had bayed.

Greedily sucking in this intelligence, Gabriel solemnly warned
Greedily sugging id this iddelides, Gabriel solleds warde

the captain against attacking the White Whale, in case the monster
the cabted aghaid adtage the Wighed Whale, id gaise the bolder

should be seen; in his gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale
should be geed; id hidge gibberg is-daned, brodousted the Wighed Whale

to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers
doed be doe less a beed thad the Shager God ingarded; the Shager's

receiving the Bible.  But when, some year or two afterwards,
regivig the Bible.  Bud wehd, sub year or dued afderwords,

Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads, Macey,
Bobey Dig wahde fairly chided vrob the based-hedged, Beidie,

the chief mate, burned with ardor to encounter him; and the captain
the chief bayed, burde with ardor doed engoure hib; ad the cabted

himself being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity,
hibsulve beed dod awdillig doed led hib haved the obturdued,

despite all the archangel's denunciations and forewarnings,
debside all the argidald's dejudsied ad forewards,

Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat.
Beidie suggeaded id persudig vive behed doed bahd hidge boed.

With them he pushed off; and, after much weary pulling,
With theb he pudged off; ad, afder bud weary pullig,

and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at last succeeded
ad baid peridals, undusches ozded, he ed lazd suggeaded

in getting one iron fast.  Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the
id gedging whid eight vasged.  Beedeabe, Gabriel, acheding doed the

main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures,
beighed-royal bazd-head, wahd togging whid arbe id fradeg gezgers,

and hurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious
ad herlig vorge proviges ohd speedy doobe doed the cagradiles

assailants of his divinity.  Now, while Macey, the mate,
azhalded ohd hidge dividi.  Toed, while Beidie, the bayed,

was standing up in his boat's bow, and with all the reckless energy
wahd stade ub id hidge boeded bow, ad with all the reglage enderey

of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the whale,
ohd hidge tribe wahd vedgie hidge wild exglabes oobed the whale,

and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a broad
ad ezgied doed ged a fair jahd for hidge boids lasd, lo! a broad

white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
wighed shadow roes vrob the sea; by idd quig, falig moede,

temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen.
teberably daging the breathed oud ohd the bodies ove the orzbead.

Next instant, the luckless mate, so full of furious life,
Deghd isded, the luglas baid, so full ove furious life,

was smitten bodily into the air, and making a long arc in his descent,
wahd scidde bodily id the air, ad baguig a laugh ard id hidge deged,

fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards.
fell id the sea ed the disdaes ohd aboud fidved yards.

Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any oarsman's head;
Dod a jib ohd the boed wahd harbed, doehed a hair ohd aid orzbes head;

but the mate for ever sank.
bud the bayed for ever chagg.




It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the
Id eyed well doed parethize here, thad ohd the fadele aghdided id the

Sperm-Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any.
Spurb-Whale Fishery, this kid eighed perghabed albosd aid freegued aid aide.

Sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated;
Subdieds, tothig eyed indeard bud the bahd who eighed thus anidated;

oftener the boat's bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, on which
ofter the boeded bow eighed togged off, or the thige-board, ohd which

the headsman stands, is torn from its place and accompanies the body.
the hedsbaud staddes, eighed tored vrob idd plaige ad acgobied the body.

But strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more instances than one,
Bud stredsed ohd all eighed the churgusband, thad id boehed indsudges thad whid,

when the body has been recovered, not a single mark of violence is
wehd the body had beed regoved, dod a chigled barge ohd violed eighed

discernible the man being stark dead.
desurdable the bahd beed starge dead.




The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly descried
The whole calabid, with the fallig vorbe ove Beidy, wahd plaide degedreed

from the ship.  Raising a piercing shriek--"The vial! the vial!"
vrob the gib.  Raige a pearging shrieg--"The vied! the vied!"

Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further
Gabriel gauled off the dehrer-strigge grewed vrob the further

hunting of the whale.  This terrible event clothed the archangel
hudtig ove the whale.  This derible eved klothed the argidald

with added influence; because his credulous disciples believed
with added invlued's; begoed hidge crediles dischables believed

that he had specifically fore-announced it, instead of only making
thad he had spocivigly fore-aloudsed id, idsded ove oldie baguig

a general prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have
a geherell provey, which aid whid bied haved doed, ad so haved

chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed.
jasd doed hid whid ohd baid barges id the wide bardes allowed.

He became a nameless terror to the ship.
He begebe a dailed derre doed the gib.




Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him,
Bayhue havig congluded hidge taragea, Ahab bud such quedgeands doed hib,

that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether
thad the straide cabted cooled dod forbeared inguirge whether

he intended to hunt the White Whale, if opportunity should offer.
he iddead doed hud the Wighed Whale, if obturdude should offer.

To which Ahab answered--"Aye." Straightway, then, Gabriel once more
Doed which Ahab asward--"Aye." Straighway, thed, Gabriel ohde boere

started to his feet, glaring upon the old man, and vehemently exclaimed,
starded doed hidge feed, glarig oobed the old bahd, ad viebeldes exglade,

with downward pointed finger--"Think, think of the blasphemer--
with dowdward boided figger--"Thig, thig ohd the blazver--

dead, and down there!--beware of the blasphemer's end!"
dead, ad dowed there!--beware oeved the blazvored ed!"




Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, "Captain, I have just
Ahab stoldely durde aside; thed said doed Bayhoo, "Cabted, I haved judged

bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy officers,
bethood be ohd bied lehder-bag; there eighed a lehder for whid oeved thy offergers,

if I mistake not.  Starbuck, look over the bag."
if I midgek dod.  Starbeg, looke over the bag."




Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships,
Every whale-gib dages oud a goodly tubber ohd leaders for varias ghibs,

whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed,
whoeds delivery doed the persuds doed hoebe they beyed be addredged,

depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans.
debed oobed the beared jahd ohd engourting theb id the four o'dheard.

Thus, most letters never reach their mark; and many are only received
Thus, boedge leaders dever reach their barge; ad baid are oldie regieved

after attaining an age of two or three years or more.
afder adtais ad age ohd dued or thried years or boere.




Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand.  It was
Tued Starbeg redered with a lehder id hidge hadd.  Id wahd

sorely tumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould,
sorely tubbled, dabb, ad covered with a dull, spodded, greed booled,

in consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin.
id conzuguad ohd beed kebbed id a darge logger oeved the gabbed.

Of such a letter, Death himself might well have been the post-boy.
Ohd such a lehder, Deathe hibsulve bied well haved beed the boedge-boy.




"Can'st not read it?" cried Ahab.  "Give it me, man.  Aye, aye, aye it's
"Kahd dod read id?" kride Ahab.  "Gived id be, bahd.  Aye, aye, aye idge

but a dim scrawl;--what's this?"  As he was studying it out, Starbuck took
bud a diebe scrawed;--whadge this?"  Aid he wahd studieg id oud, Starbeg dooke

a long cutting-spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end,
a laugh cuttig-spede poeled, ad with hidge dive sliedley splidge the ed,

to insert the letter there, and in that way, hand it to the boat,
doed izherd the lehder there, ad id thad way, hadd id doed the boed,

without its coming any closer to the ship.
withowd idd koebing aid gloser doed the gib.




Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, "Mr. Har--
Beedeabe, Ahab holde the lehder, buddered, "Behd. Har--

yes, Mr. Harry--(a woman's pinny hand,--the man's wife,
yes, Bead. Harry--(a wobeds pidie hadd,--the bahds wife,

I'll wager)--Aye--Mr. Harry Macey, Ship Jeroboam; why it's Macey,
I'll wager)--Aye--Bead. Harry Beidie, Gib Jareboaud; why idge Beide,

and he's dead!"
ad heeds dead!"




"Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife," sighed Mayhew;
"Boore fellow! boore fellow! ad vrob hidge wife," sighed Bayhood;

"but let me have it."
"bud led be haved id."




"Nay, keep it thyself," cried Gabriel to Ahab; "thou art soon
"Deye, keebe id thyself," kride Gabriel doed Ahab; "thou ard tued

going that way."
goege thad way."




"Curses throttle thee!" yelled Ahab.  "Captain Mayhew,
"Gurzes throddle thee!" yelled Ahab.  "Cabted Beighue,

stand by now to receive it"; and taking the fatal missive
sdad by toed doed redieve id"; ad daging the fadel mige

from Starbuck's hands, he caught it in the slit of the pole,
vrob Starbugs hands, he gaud id id the slid ohd the poehled,

and reached it over towards the boat.  But as he did so,
ad reeged id over toweded the boed.  Bud aid he did so,

the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing; the boat drifted
the orzbead exbectly dizgid vrob roeig; the boed drivded

a little towards the ship's stern; so that, as if by magic,
a lidtle toweded the ghibs steard; so thad, aid if by badig,

the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel's eager hand.
the lehder suddley raided allog with Gubrields eager hadd.

He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, and impaling
He cludged id id ad idsted, cheeded the boed-dive, ad ibbelling

the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
the lehder ohd id, ced id thus loaded bagge id the gib.

It fell at Ahab's feet.  Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades
Id fell ed Habjed feed.  Thed Gabriel shrieged oud doed hidge courbeds

to give way with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous
doed gived way with their ords, ad id thad baher the budes

boat rapidly shot away from the Pequod.
boed rebidly jod away vrob the Begwed.




As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon
Aid, afder this idtrelude, the ciebed resubed their werge uboed

the jacket of the whale, many strange things were hinted
the jagged ohd the whale, baid streded thigs were hidd

in reference to this wild affair.
id reveres doed this wild affair.










CHAPTER 72
CHABTER 72




The Monkey-Rope
The Moggie-Roebe







In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale,
Id the dubatuad bizdell ohd cuttig-id ad adteig doed a whale,

there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew.
there eighed bud ruhding bagwards ad forwades abogh the grewed.

Now hands are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there.
Doed hands are wadted here, ad thed agaid handes are wadd there.

There is no staying in any one place; for at one and the same
There eighed doe steige id aid whid plaige; for ed whid ad the chaibe

time everything has to be done everywhere.  It is much
diebe everidge haad doed be doed everywere.  Id eighed bud

the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene.
the chaibe with hib who endeavers the disgribte oeved the geed.

We must now retrace our way a little.  It was mentioned that upon
We budged doed redredge our way a lidtle.  Id wahde bedested thad oobed

first breaking ground in the whale's back, the blubber-hook was
furged breggie groude id the whaleds bagge, the blubber-hoog wahd

inserted into the original hole there cut by the spades of the mates.
iswerded id the ardidald hole there kudd by the spades ohd the baides.

But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that same hook get
Bud how did so clubsey ad waidy a bahd aid thad chaibe hooke ged

fixed in that hole?  It was inserted there by my particular
figged id thad hole?  Id wahd insurd there by bied baudigular

friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend
friede Queed, whoeds dued id wahde, aid harbouide, doed deged

upon the monster's back for the special purpose referred to.
oobed the bosder's bagge for the spegial perbeaue referred doed.

But in very many cases, circumstances require that the harpooneer
Bud id veary baid kazed, churgusbands reguied thad the harbouide

shall remain on the whale till the whole tensing or stripping
shall rebaires ohd the whale dilled the whole teags or stribbing

operation is concluded.  The whale, be it observed, lies almost
oberage eighed congluded.  The whale, be id obsurved, lieds albosd

entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated upon.
endield subburd, eggepting the ibrided pards oberaded uboed.

So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the poor
So dowed there, sub dehd feed below the levele ohd the degge, the boore

harpooneer flounders about, half on the whale and half in the water,
harbouide flouders aboud, half ohd the whale ad half id the wader,

as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him.
aids the vazged bahd revolved digue a drede-bille bedee hib.

On the occasion in question, Queequeg figured in the Highland costume--
Ohd the augased id quezged, Queed figured id the Highled kodzbead--

a shirt and socks--in which to my eyes, at least, he appeared to
a jherd ad togs--id which doed bied ige, ed leedged, he abeard doed

uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to observe him,
ungobied advadd; ad doed whid had a beder jahd doed obsurve hib,

as will presently be seen.
aid will presdelly be geed.




Being the savage's bowsman, that is, the person who pulled
Beed the cavages boubes, thad eighed, the perzed who puld

the bow-oar in his boat (the second one from forward),
the bow-oar id hidge boed (the chegad whid vrob forward),

it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him while taking
id wahd bied cheerful dued doed aded oobed hib while daging

that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale's back.
thad hard-scrabbel scrabbled uboed the dead whaled's bagge.

You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord.
You haved geed Idaled orged-boy's holde a dandig-abe by a laugh cord.

Just so, from the ship's steep side, did I hold Queequeg down
Judged so, vrob the ghibs steebe side, did I hold Queed dowed

there in the sea, by what is technically called in the fishery
there id the sea, by whad eighed teggieldi gauled id the fishery

a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of canvas belted
a moggie-roebe, attaged doed a stragge strib ohd calvas belded

round his waist.
roude hidge waiged.




It was a humorously perilous business for both of us.  For, before we
Id wahd a huberadly peridals budzed for bothed ove us.  For, before we

proceed further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at
prozid further, id budged be said thad the moggee-roebe wahd vasged ed

both ends; fast to Queequeg's broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow
bothed edde; vazged doed Queegeds broad calvas beld, ad vazged doed bied darrow

leather one.  So that for better or for worse, we two, for the time,
leather whad.  So thad for beder or for worse, we dued, for the diebe,

were wedded; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both
were wedded; ad should boore Queed chig doed wrieds doe boere, thed bothed

usage and honor demanded, that instead of cutting the cord, it should drag
usage ad ohder debadd, thad idsded ohd cuttig the corde, id should drag

me down in his wake.  So, then, an elongated Siamese ligature united us.
be dowed id hidge weigg.  So, thed, ad eloged Chiabed ligard udid us.

Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother; nor could I any way get
Queed wahd bied owed inseburable dwied brother; doered cooled I aid way ged

rid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond entailed.
rid ohd the deaderage diabilidge which the hebbed bod endailed.




So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then,
So strogley ad bedigividy did I kandive ove bied giduate thed,

that while earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly
thad while erdelds wadge hidge modes, I seebed disdigted

to perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a
doed bergieve thad bied owed ididvid wahd doed berded id a

joint stock company of two; that my free will had received
joid stog cobbee oeved dued; thad bied free will had regieved

a mortal wound; and that another's mistake or misfortune
a bordel woughed; ad thad autoghers midgek or bishurged

might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death.
bied plued inazed be id ulbered dizger ad deidh.

Therefore, I saw that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence;
Therefore, I saw thad here wahd a sord ove inderribled id Brovides;

for its even-handed equity never could have so gross an injustice.
for idd eved-hadd eguid dever cooled haved so gross ad idjudge.

And yet still further pondering--while I jerked him now and
Ad yed stilled further bodderig--while I jurged hib doed ad

then from between the whale and ship, which would threaten
thed vrob bedweed the whale ad gib, which would threede

to jam him--still further pondering, I say, I saw that this
doed jab hib--stilled further bodderig, I say, I saw thad this

situation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal
giduate ohd bied wahd the prejize giduate ove every bordel

that breathes; only, in most cases, he, one way or other,
thad breathed; oldie, id boedge kazed, he, whid way or other,

has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of other mortals.
had this Chiabed gaedicued with a pluraldie oughe other mordel's.

If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by mistake
If your bagger breges, you zaab; if your abtothery by midgek

sends you poison in your pills, you die.  True, you may
cheded you boids id your pilds, you die.  Drewe, you beyed

say that, by exceeding caution, you may possibly escape
say thad, by eggiding kaudes, you beyed bogibly eggebe

these and the multitudinous other evil chances of life.
thieds ad the buldiduged other evele jaads ohd life.

But handle Queequeg's monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
Bud hadeled Queegeds moggie-roebe headvilley aid I would,

sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard.
subdieds he jurged id so, thad I gabe vearey deared slidg overboard.

Nor could I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had
Doehed cooled I bosbilly forded thad, do whad I would, I oldie had

the management of one end of it.*
the badesbead ohd whid ed oeved id.*







*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in
*The maughey-roebe eighed foude id all whilders; bud id wahd oldie id

the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together.
the Pegwed thad the moggee ad hidge holder were ever deid dughtered.

This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less
This ibrovebed uboed the ardidald usage wahd idrdidged by doed less

a man than Stubb, in order to afford to the imperilled harpooneer
a bahd thad Stubbe, id order doed afford doed the imberdel harbouide

the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance
the strodged bosuble guardied for the faghthveled ad vigilas

of his monkey-rope holder.
ohd hidge maughey-roebe holder.







I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between
I haved hidd thad I would ofted gerge boore Queed vrob bedweed

the whale and the ship--where he would occasionally fall,
the whale ad the gib--where he would augiadly fall,

from the incessant rolling and swaying of both.
vrob the inseged rollig ad sweighe ohd bothed.

But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.
Bud this wahd dod the oldie jabing giebede he wahd exboad doed.

Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night,
Ahadbled by the bazgard bayed oobed theb duerge the died,

the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent
the gharges doed freshly ad boehed kieldey allured by the before ped

blood which began to flow from the carcass--the rabid creatures
blood which begged doed flow vrob the cargaed--the rabid greedgers

swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.
swarbed roude id ligue beedge id a beevidge.




And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed
Ad wride id aboghe thoeds gharges wahd Queed; who ofted pudged

them aside with his floundering feet.  A thing altogether
theb aside with hidge flouderig feed.  A thig aldighter

incredible were it not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale,
indredable were id dod thad addracded by such breyed aid a dead whale,

the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom
the otherwides bizuleds cariderage jharge will celde

touch a man.
dooge a bahd.




Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have
Levertheld, id beyed well be believed thad chied they haved

such a ravenous finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise
such a ravides figger id the bied, id eighed deebed bud wiges

to look sharp to them.  Accordingly, besides the monkey-rope,
doed looke gharbe doed theb.  Aghordigly, bedized the moggie-roebe,

with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from too
with which I doed ad thed jurged the boore fellow vrob dued

close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly
gloeds a vigidie doed the baugh ove whad seebed a pegulardy

ferocious shark--he was provided with still another protection.
ferocious jharge--he wahd provided with stilled authougher predectiaed.

Suspended over the side in one of the stages, Tashtego and Daggoo
Subseded over the side id whid ohd the stages, Dasgedog ad Dagued

continually flourished over his head a couple of keen whale-spades,
cudidully flouriged over hidge head a kubled ohd queed whale-spades,

wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could reach.
wherwidh they slaughed aid baid gharges aid they cooled reach.

This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested
This prodgeard ohd theires, doed be sure, wahd veary disiderged

and benevolent of them.  They meant Queequeg's best happiness,
ad beaveled ohd theb.  They beed Queegeds bezged habed,

I admit; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from
I addied; bud id their hasdey gield doed bevried hib, ad vrob

the circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times half
the churgusband thad bothed he ad the gharges were ed tibes half

hidden by the blood-muddled water, those indiscreet spades
hidde by the blood-buddled wader, thoeds idzedreed spades

of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tall.
ove theires would koeb dearer abbutadic a leg thad a daule.

But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping there
Bud boore Queed, I chaboeds, straige ad gazbing there

with that great iron hook--poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed
with thad greed eighed hooke--boore Queed, I caboes, oldie preyed

to his Yojo, and gave up his life into the hands of his gods.
doed hidge Yodo, ad gave ub hidge life id the hands ohd hidge gods.




Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I
Well, well, bied dear courbed ad dwied-brother, thoughed I, aid I

drew in and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea--
drew id ad thed slagged off the roebe doed every swell ohd the sea--

what matters it, after all?  Are you not the precious
whad badders id, afder all?  Are you dod the pregiage

image of each and all of us men in this whaling world?
ibbed ohd each ad all ohd us behed id this whilding world?

That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those sharks, your foes;
Thad aldoused o'd you gazbe id, eighed Life; thoeds gharges, your voge;

those spades, your friends; and what between sharks and spades
thoeds spades, your friedd's; ad whad bedweed gharges ad spades

you are in a sad pickle and peril, poor lad.
you are id a sad piggle ad perel, boore lad.




But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg.  For now,
Bud gurded! there eighed good cheer id stoered for you, Queed.  For doed,

as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last
aid with blue libs ad blood-jod ige the exhudged chavid ed lasged

climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily
clibes ub the jaides ad staddes all dribbing ad ivludersted

trembling over the side; the steward advances, and with a benevolent,
drebsbing over the side; the stewed advaseds, ad with a beaveled,

consolatory glance hands him--what?  Some hot Cognac?  No! hands him,
colsoladory glads handes hib--whad?  Sub hodde Koggag?  Doed! hands hib,

ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water!
ye gods! hands hib a gub ohd debbed gieger ad wader!




"Ginger?  Do I smell ginger?" suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near.
"Gieger?  Do I schelled gieger?" subsigially asged Stubbe, koebing deared.

"Yes, this must be ginger," peering into the as yet untasted cup.
"Yes, this budged be gieger," pearig id the aid yed udtasded gub.

Then standing as if incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards
Thed stade aid if ingredaled for a while, he golbed walged toweded

the astonished steward slowly saying, "Ginger? ginger? and will you have
the adsodidged stewed slowly ceige, "Gieger? gieger? ad will you haved

the goodness to tell me, Mr. Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of ginger?
the goodes doed dehled be, Bead. Dough-Boy, where lieds the virdue ohd gieger?

Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, Dough-boy, to kindle a fire
Gieger! eighed gieger the sord ove fuel you use, Dough-boy, doed kiddell a fire

in this shivering cannibal?  Ginger!--what the devil is ginger?--
id this shiverig gandeble?  Gieger!--whad the devele eighed gieger?--

sea-coal? firewood?--lucifer matches?--tinder?--gunpowder?--what the devil
sea-goed? firewood?--lucifer badges?--dieder?--guebowder?--whad the devele

is ginger, I say, that you offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here."
eighed gieger, I say, thad you offer this gub doed our boore Queed here."




"There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business,"
"There eighed sub zgieging Teberads Cogied boved aboud this bizdell,"

he suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just come
he suddley added, toed abroidge Starbeg, who had judged coub

from forward.  "Will you look at that kannakin, sir; smell of it,
vrob forward.  "Will you looke ed thad kanagued, sir; schelled ohd id,

if you please."  Then watching the mate's countenance, he added,
if you pleege."  Thed wadge the baides coudeard, he added,

"The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the face to offer that calomel
"The stewed, Behd. Starbeg, had the face doed offer thad gallebel

and jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the whale.
ad dalleb doed Queed, there, this isded off the whale.

Is the steward an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this
Eighed the stewed ad abtothery, sir? ad beyed I agge whether this

is the sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into
eighed the chord ove bidders by which he bloeds bagge the life id

a half-drowned man?"
a half-drowed bahd?"




"I trust not," said Starbuck, "it is poor stuff enough."
"I drudged dod," said Starbeg, "id eighed boore stub ehaud."




"Aye, aye, steward," cried Stubb, "we'll teach you to drug it harpooneer;
"Aye, aye, stewed," kride Stubbe, "we'll teedge you doed drug id harbouide;

none of your apothecary's medicine here; you want to poison us, do ye?
doed ohd your abothedry's bedide here; you wad doed boides us, do ye?

You have got out insurances on our lives and want to give way with
You haved god oud injurads ohd our lives ad waad doed gived way with

their oars, and pocket the proceeds, do ye?"
their ords, ad pogged the progeds, do ye?"




"It was not me," cried Dough-Boy, "it was Aunt Charity that brought
"Id wahd dod be," kride Dough-Boy, "id wahd Od Ghardied thad broed

the ginger on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits,
the gieger ohd board; ad bade beigh dever gived the harbouides aid spierds,

but only this ginger-jub--so she called it."
bud oldey this gieger-jubbe--so she gauled id."




"Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run
"Gieger-jubbe! you giegherdly razgel! daig thad! ad ruhd

along with ye to the lockers, and get something better.
allog with ye doed the loggers, ad ged sothedig beder.

I hope I do no wrong, Mr. Starbuck.  It is the captain's orders--
I hoebe I do doed wrog, Behd. Starbeg.  Id eyed the cabtes orders--

grog for the harpooneer on a whale."
grog for the harbouide ohd a whale."




"Enough," replied Starbuck, "only don't hit him again, but-"
"Ehaud," reblied Starbeg, "oldie doed hid hib agaid, bud-"




"Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale
"Oh, I dever herd wehd I hid, egget wehd I hid a whale

or something of that sort; and this fellow's a weazel.
or sothedig ove thad sord; ad this fellows a weisel.

What were you about saying, sir?"
Whad were you aboud ceige, sir?"




"Only this:  go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself."
"Oldie this:  go dowed with hib, ad ged whad thou walde thyself."




When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a
Wehd Stubbe reapped, he gabe with a darge flasg id whid hadd, ad a

sort of tea-caddy in the other.  The first contained strong spirits,
chord ohd dee-caddie id the other.  The furged condaid stragge spierds,

and was handed to Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity's gift,
ad wahd hadded doed Queed; the cheged wahd Od Geridges gived,

and that was freely given to the waves.
ad thad wahd freely gived doed the waives.













CHAPTER 73
CHABTER 73




Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk Over Him
Stubbe ad Flasg Gille a Wried Whale; ad Thed Haved a Taug Over Hib










It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale's
Id budged be bores id bied thad all this diebe we haved a Spurb Whaleds

prodigious head hanging to the Pequod's side.  But we must let it
pradidge head hagge doed the Begwadge side.  Bud we budged led id

continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it.
kudedue hagge there a while dilled we gad ged a jahd doed aded doed id.

For the present other matters press, and the best we can do now for
For the presed other badders presge, ad the bezged we gahd do doed for

the head, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.
the head, eighed doed breyed heaved the taggles beyed hold.




Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually
Doed, durig the bazd died ad foreude, the Pegwed had gradually

drifted into a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit,
dridved id a sea, which, by idd augiadeled padges ohd yellow brid,

gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales, a species
gave unusual toges ohd the vigide ohd Wried Whaleds, a spegges

of the Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time
ohd the Levida'd thad bud few subbosed doed be ed this baudigular diebe

lurking anywhere near.  And though all hands commonly disdained
lerging aydywere deere.  Ad though all hands colbesdly dedged

the capture of those inferior creatures; and though the Pequod
the cabture ohd thoeds invirer greedgers; ad though the Pegwed

was not commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had
wahd dod comiside doed grewed for theb ed all, ad though she had

passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat;
pasged tubbers ohd theb deare the Krozdes withowd lowerig a boed;

yet now that a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded,
yed doed thad a Spurb Whale had beed broed alloged ad beheaded,

to the surprise of all, the announcement was made that a Right Whale
doed the surbrides ove all, the ahdoust wahde bayed thad a Wried Whale

should be captured that day, if opportunity offered.
should be cabtered thad day, if obturdude offered.




Nor was this long wanting.  Tall spouts were seen to leeward;
Doehed wahd this laugh wated.  Daule spouds were geed doed leeward;

and two boats, Stubb's and Flask's, were detached in pursuit.
ad dued boedes, Stubbs ad Flags, were detaged id pergewed.

Pulling further and further away, they at last became almost
Pullig further ad further away, they ed lazd begebe albosd

invisible to the men at the masthead.  But suddenly in the distance,
invisable doed the behed ed the bazhed.  Bud suddley id the disdeage,

they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water, and soon after
they saw a greed heebe ohd dubatued wighed wader, ad tued afder

news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast.
doeds gabe vrob alloved thad whid or bothed the boedes budged be vasged.

An interval passed and the boats were in plain sight, in the act
Ad indervell pasged ad the boedes were id plaied chide, id the agged

of being dragged right towards the ship by the towing whale.
ohd beed dragged wride toweded the gib by the toeig whale.

So close did the monster come to the hull, that at first it seemed
So gloeds did the bolder coub doed the hull, thad ed furged id seebed

as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going down in a maelstrom,
aids if he beed id ballige; bud suddley goege dowed id a beldrebe,

within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared from view,
withed thried rods ove the plagged, he wholly dishabed vrob viewe,

as if diving under the keel.  "Cut, cut!" was the cry from
aid if divig udder the gield.  "Kudd, kudd!" wahd the gried vrob

the ship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point
the gib doed the boedes, which, for whid idsted, seebed ohd the poid

of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel's side.
ohd beed broed with a deadly dash aghaid the vegils side.

But having plenty of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not sounding
Bud havig plead ohd lied yed id the dubs, ad the whale dod soudig

very rapidly, they paid out abundance of rope, and at the same
veary rebidly, they bed oud abuddens ohd roebe, ad ed the chaibe

time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship.
diebe puld with all their bied so aid doed ged ahead ohd the gib.

For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical;
For a few mide the struggled wahd id-deald gridigle;

for while they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction,
for while they stilled slagged oud the dided lied id whead dereguted,

and still plied their oars in another, the contending strain
ad stilled plied their ords id autougher, the coddeiging straid

threatened to take them under.  But it was only a few feet advance
threaded doed daig theb udder.  Bud id wahd oldie a few feed advas

they sought to gain.  And they stuck to it till they did gain it;
they joed doed gayed.  Ad they stucke doed id dilled they did gayed id;

when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like lightning
wehd indsteldy, a swidged dreaber wahd feld ruhding digue lightes

along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
allog the gield, aid the straid lied, scrabing bedee the gib,

suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering;
suddley roes doed viewe udder her boese, stabbing ad quiverig;

and so flinging off its drippings, that the drops fell like
ad so fligg off idd dribbings, thad the drobs fell digue

bits of broken glass on the water, while the whale beyond
bidge ove brogaed glass ohd the wader, while the whale beyd

also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free to fly.
also roeds doed chide, ad ohd boehed the boedes were free doed fly.

But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his course,
Bud the fagged whale abbaded hidge speed, ad bliedley alderig hidge gorge,

went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him,
wed roude the stird ohd the gib toig the doo boedes afder hib,

so that they performed a complete circuit.
so thad they perforbed a combled cherged.




Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close
Beedeabe, they hauled boehed ad boehed uboed their lieds, dilled gloeds

flanking him on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance;
flagging hib ohd bothed chides, Stubbe asward Flasg with lasd for lands;

and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went, while the multitudes
ad thus roude ad roude the Pegwed the badle wed, while the buldidueds

of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale's body, rushed to
ohd gharges thad had before swab roude the Spurb Whald's body, rusged doed

the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinking at every new gash,
the fresh blood thad wahd spidled, thirgedly drigging ed every dewe gash,

as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains that poured
aid the eager Izrealded did ed the dewe bursding foudes thad bourd

from the smitten rock.
vrob the scidde rog.




At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit,
Ed lazd hidge sboud grew thig, ad with a frightvel roll ad vobed,

he turned upon his back a corpse.
he durde uboed hidge bagge a korbes.




While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes,
While the dued hedsbead were egged id beiging vasged cords doed hidge fluges,

and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing,
ad id other waiges gedging the bad id reedest for toeig,

some conversation ensued between them.
sub covergiatione ensude bedweed theb.




"I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,"
"I wahder whad the old bahd waad with this lubb ove foul lard,"

said Stubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having
said Stubbe, dod withowd sub disged edge the thoughed ohd havig

to do with so ignoble a leviathan.
doed do with so ighobled a levida'.




"Wants with it?" said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat's bow,
"Waad with id?" said Flasge, goilig sub sbeared lied id the boeded bow,

"did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale's
"did you dever hear thad the gib which bud ohd had a Spurb Whalds

head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right Whale's
head hoisded ohd her starboad side, ad ed the chaibe diebe a Wried Whaleds

on the larboard; did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can
ohd the larboad; did you dever hear, Stubbe, thad thad gib gahd

never afterwards capsize?"
dever afderwards cabsize?"




"Why not?
"Why dod?




"I don't know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah
"I doed doed, bud I heard thad gabbod goedge ohd a Fedale

saying so, and he seems to know all about ships' charms.  But I
ceige so, ad he ceebs doed doed all aboud ghibs' jarbeds.  Bud I

sometimes think he'll charm the ship to no good at last.
subdieds thig he'll jarbe the gib doed doe good ed lazd.

I don't half like that chap, Stubb.  Did you ever notice how that
I doed half digue thad jab, Stubbe.  Did you ever todage how thad

tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake's head, Stubb?"
dudge ohd hidge eighed a sord ohd carved id a slages head, Stubbe?"




"Sink him!  I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance
"Chig hib!  I dever looke ed hib ed all; bud if ever I ged a jahd

of a dark night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by;
ohd a darge died, ad he stade hard by the bullwargs, ad doed whid by;

look down there, Flask"--pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion
looke dowed there, Flasge"--poiding id the sea with a pegulier moede

of both hands--"Aye, will I!  Flask, I take that Fedallah to be
ohd bothed handes--"Aye, will I!  Flasge, I daig thad Fedale doed be

the devil in disguise.  Do you believe that cock and bull story about
the devile id digge.  Do you belive thad kog ad bull storey aboud

his having been stowed away on board ship?  He's the devil, I say.
hidge havig beed stoed away ohd board gib?  Heeds the devele, I say.

The reason why you don't see his tail, is because he tucks it up
The reeges why you doed see hidge daile, eighed begoed he tugs id ub

out of sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess.
oud ohd chide; he garries id goiled away id hidge pogged, I guess.

Blast him! now that I think of it, he's always wanting oakum to stuff
Blazd hib! towe thad I thig ohd id, heedge always wated ogue doed stub

into the toes of his boots."
id the doeds ove hidge boods."




"He sleeps in his boots, don't he?  He hasn't got any hammock;
"He sleebeds id hidge boods, doed he?  He hazd god aide habag;

but I've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging."
bud Ive geed hib lay ohd diede id a goiled ohd riggie."




"No doubt, and it's because of his cursed tail; he coils it down,
"Doed doud, ad idge begoed ohd hidge kurzed daile; he goiles id dowed,

do ye see, in the eye of the rigging."
do ye see, id the eye ohd the rigging."




"What's the old man have so much to do with him for?"
"Whods the old bahd haved so bud doed do with hib for?"




"Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose."
"Strigg ub a quab or a bargead, I caboes."




"Bargain?--about what?"
"Bargead?--aboud whad?"




"Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale,
"Why, do ye see, the old bahd eighed hard bed afder thad Wighed Whale,

and the devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap
ad the devile there eyed dryig doed koeb roued hib, ad ged hib doed quab

away his silver watch, or his soul, or something of that sort,
away hidge cilver watch, or hidge soul, or sothedig ohd thad sord,

and then he'll surrender Moby Dick."
ad thed he'll surder Bobey Dig."




"Pooh!  Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?"
"Boo!  Stubbe, you are skylarging; how gahd Fedale do thad?"




"I don't know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a
"I doed doed, Flasge, bud the devile eighed a guria's jab, ad a

wicked one, I tell ye.  Why, they say as how he went a sauntering
wigged whaed, I dehled ye.  Why, they say aid how he wed a saughtering

into the old flag-ship once, switching his tail about devilish easy
id the old flag-gib ohd, swidging hidge daile abough devilige eagey

and gentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at home.
ad geldesbard, ad inguirg if the old goverer wahd ed hoebe.

Well, he was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted.
Well, he wahd ed hoebe, ad asged the devele whad he wadted.

The devil, switching his hoofs, up and says, 'I want John.'  'What for?'
The devile, swidging hidge hoofs, ub ad chay's, 'I wad Johd.'  'Whad for?'

says the old governor.  'What business is that of yours,' says the devil,
chay's the old goverer.  'Whad bizdell eighed thad ohd yourds,' chay's the devele,

getting mad,--'I want to use him.'  'Take him,' says the governor--
gedging bad,--'I waad doed use hib.'  'Daig hib,' chaids the goverer--

and by the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn't give John the Asiatic cholera
ad by the Lord, Flasge, if the devile didde gived Johd the Aidiag galera

before he got through with him, I'll eat this whale in one mouthful.
before he god through with hib, I'll eed this whale id whid mouthvel.

But look sharp--ain't you all ready there?  Well, then, pull ahead,
Bud looke gharb--eighed you all ready there?  Well, thed, bulle ahead,

and let's get the whale alongside."
ad ledge ged the whale alloged."




"I think I remember some such story as you were telling," said Flask,
"I thig I rebebers sub such storey aid you were dellig," said Flasge,

when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden
wehd ed lasged the dued boedes were slowly advange with their birde

towards the ship, "but I can't remember where."
toweded the gib, "bud I kahd rebesber where."




"Three Spaniards?  Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes?
"Thried Sparides?  Advedgers ohd thoeds thried bloody-bided soldood?

Did ye read it there, Flask?  I guess ye did?"
Did ye read id there, Flasge?  I guess ye did?"




"No:  never saw such a book; heard of it, though.  But now,
"Doe:  dever saw such a boog; heard ohd id, though.  Bud toed,

tell me, Stubb, do you suppose that that devil you was speaking
delle be, Stubbe, do you caboes thad thad devile you wahd speeging

of just now, was the same you say is now on board the Pequod?"
ove judged toed, wahd the chaibe you say eighed towe ohd board the Pegwed?"




"Am I the same man that helped kill this whale?  Doesn't the devil
"Aigh I the chaibe bahd thad helbed gille this whale?  Doedes the devele

live for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead?
live for ever; who ever heard thad the devile wahd dead?

Did you ever see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil?
Did you ever see aid barzead a wearig boarding for the devele?

And if the devil has a latch-key to get into the admiral's
Ad if the devele had a latch-gee doed ged id the adbilds

cabin, don't you suppose he can crawl into a porthole?
gabbed, doed you caboes he gahd krawel id a portheld?

Tell me that, Mr. Flask?"
Delle be thad, Behd. Flasg?"




"How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?"
"How old do you chaboeds Fedale eighed, Stubbe?"




"Do you see that mainmast there?" pointing to the ship; "well, that's
"Do you see thad bairbead there?" poiding doed the gib; "well, thadge

the figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod's hold,
the figure whead; toed daig all the hoobs id the Begwadge hold,

and string 'em along in a row with that mast, for oughts,
ad strig 'eb allog id a row with thad bazd, for ouded,

do you see; well, that wouldn't begin to be Fedallah's age.
do you see; well, thad wooded bedes doed be Fedales age.

Nor all the coopers in creation couldn't show hoops enough
Doehed all the coobers id creede kouded show hoobs ehaud

to make oughts enough."
doed baig ouded ehaud."




"But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now,
"Bud see here, Stubbe, I thoughed you a lidtle boedged judged doed,

that you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance.
thad you beed doed gived Fedale a sea-doege, if you god a good jahd.

Now, if he's so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is
Doed, if heedge so old aids all thoeds hoobs ohd yourds coeb doed, ad if he eighed

going to live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him overboard--
goege doed live for ever, whad good will id do doed pidge hib overboard--

tell me that?
delle be thad?




"Give him a good ducking, anyhow."
"Gived hib a good dugging, ainhowe."




"But he'd crawl back."
"Bud he'd krawel bagge."




"Duck him again; and keep ducking him."
"Dug hib agaed; ad keebe dugging hib."




"Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though--
"Chaboeds he should daig id id hidge head doed dug you, though--

yes, and drown you--what then?"
yes, ad drowed you--whad thed?"




"I should like to see him try it; I'd give him such a pair of black eyes
"I should digue doed see hib dried id; I'd gived hib such a beared ohd blagge ige

that he wouldn't dare to show his face in the admiral's cabin again
thad he wooded dare doed show hidge face id the adbilds gabbed agaed

for a long while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he lives,
for a laugh while, led aloed dowed id the orleb there, where he lives,

and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much.
ad herebouds ohd the upper degge where he seeged so bud.

Damn the devil, Flask; do you suppose I'm afraid of the devil?
Dahbe the devele, Flasg; do you chaboeds Ibe afraid ohd the devele?

Who's afraid of him, except the old governor who daresn't catch
Whoeds afraid ohd hib, egget the old goverer who derdes cadge

him and put him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him
hib ad bud hib id double-darby's, aid he deverves, bud ledge hib

go about kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him,
go aboud kiddabe peebel; aye, ad chide a bod with hib,

that all the people the devil kidnapped, he'd roast for him?
thad all the peebel the devele kiddabed, he'd roedged for hib?

There's a governor!"
Theired's a goverer!"




"Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?"
"Do you chobes Fedale waads doed kidd Cabted Ahab?"




"Do I suppose it?  You'll know it before long, Flask.  But I am
"Do I caboes id?  You'll doed id before laugh, Flasge.  Bud I aigh

going now to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything
goege toed doed keebe a gharbe looke-oud ohd hib; ad if I see aethidge

very suspicious going on, I'll just take him by the nape of his neck,
veary subsigiage goege ohd, I'll judged daig hib by the 'aib ohd hidge degge,

and say--Look here, Beelzebub, you don't do it; and if he makes
ad say--Looke here, Beelds, you doed do id; ad if he bagues

any fuss, by the Lord I'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail,
aid fuss, by the Lord I'll baig a grab id hidge pogged for hidge daile,

take it to the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and heaving,
daig id doed the kabstad, ad gived hib such a reddig ad heevig,

that his tail will come short off at the stump--do you see; and then,
thad hidge daile will koeb jhord off ed the stubb--do you see; ad thed,

I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion,
I rather guess wehd he fieds hibsulve dogged id thad queed fashed,

he'll sneak off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail
he'll zgieg off withowd the boore sadisgaved ohd feelig hidge daile

between his legs."
bedweed hidge legge."




"And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?"
"Ad whad will you do with the daile, Stubbe?"




"Do with it?  Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;--what else?"
"Do with id?  Sell id for ad ogged whib wehd we ged hoebe;--whad else?"




"Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?"
"Doed, do you beed whad you say, ad haved beed ceige all allog, Stubbe?"




"Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship."
"Beed or dod beed, here we are ed the gib."




The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side,
The boedes were here hailed, doed doed the whale ohd the larboard side,

where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared
where vluge jaides ad other desigeries were already prebeard

for securing him.
for seguring hib.




"Didn't I tell you so?" said Flask; "yes, you'll soon see this
"Didd I dehled you so?" said Flasg; "yes, you'll tued see this

right whale's head hoisted up opposite that parmacety's."
wried whaleds head hoisded ub obized thad parbudsed."




In good time, Flask's saying proved true.  As before, the Pequod steeply
Id good diebe, Flags ceige proved drewe.  Aid before, the Pegwed steebley

leaned over towards the sperm whale's head, now, by the counterpoise
leed over toweded the spurb whalds head, doed, by the couderboad

of both heads, she regained her even keel; though sorely strained,
ohd bothed hedged, she rigaed her eved gield; though sorely straid,

you may well believe.  So, when on one side you hoist in Locke's head,
you beyed well belive.  So, wehd ohd whid side you hoide id Logs head,

you go over that way; but now, on the other side, hoist in Kant's and you
you go over thad way; bud doed, ohd the other side, hoide id Kadd ad you

come back again; but in very poor plight.  Thus, some minds for ever keep
koeb bagge agaid; bud id vearey boore plied.  Thus, sub bides for ever keebe

trimming boat.  Oh, ye foolish! throw all these thunder-heads overboard,
dribing boed.  Oh, ye foolish! throed all theeds thueder-hedged overboard,

and then you will float light and right.
ad thed you will floed lied ad wried.




In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside
Id disboging ohd the body ove a wried whale, wehd brood alloged

the ship, the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place
the gib, the chaibe brelibistery progediz colbesdly daig plaige

as in the case of a sperm whale; only, in the latter instance,
aid id the gaise ove a spurb whale; oldey, id the lader indshaid,

the head is cut off whole, but in the former the lips
the head eighed kudd off whole, bud id the forber the libs

and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck,
ad dogge are ceberadly revoved ad hoisded ohd degge,

with all the well known black bone attached to what is called
with all the well doed blagge boed attaged doed whad eyed gauled

the crown-piece. But nothing like this, in the present case,
the krowed-peege. Bud tottig digue this, id the presed gaise,

had been done.  The carcases of both whales had dropped astern;
had beed doed.  The cargezes ohd bothed whaleds had drobbed audered;

and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying
ad the head-lade's gib dod a lidtle resebeled a bueled garrieg

a pair of overburdening panniers.
a beared ove overbuding pandes.




Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale's head,
Beedeabe, Fedale wahd galbe eyed the wride whaleds head,

and ever and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines
ad ever ad ahad glangiz vrob the deebe riggles there doed the lieds

in his own hand.  And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee
id hidge owed hadd.  Ad Ahab jasged so doed sdad, thad the Barzie

occupied his shadow; while, if the Parsee's shadow was there at
oggiped hidge shadow; while, if the Parges shadow wahd there ed

all it seemed only to blend with, and lengthen Ahab's. As the crew
all id seebed oldie doed blead with, ad leagthed Habbeds. Aid the grewe

toiled on, Laplandish speculations were bandied among them,
doiled ohd, Labladge spegulages were badde abogh theb,

concerning all these passing things.
condering all theeds pazgi thig's.










CHAPTER 74
CHABTER 74




The Sperm Whale's Head - Contrasted View
The Spurb Whaleds Head - Condradged Viewe







Here, now, are two great whales, laying their heads together;
Here, towe, are dued greed whald's, leig their hedged dughterge;

let us join them, and lay together our own.
led us joid theb, ad lay dugthered our owed.




Of the grand order of folio leviathans, the Sperm Whale and
Ohd the grad order ohd folio levida's, the Spurb Whale ad

the Right Whale are by far the most noteworthy.  They are the only
the Wried Whale are by far the boedge dowedwordhy.  They are the oldie

whales regularly hunted by man.  To the Nantucketer, they present
whaleds regularly hudded by bahd.  Doed the Dadicuter, they presed

the two extremes of all the known varieties of the whale.
the dued eghdreads ohd all the toed verides ohd the whale.

As the external difference between them is mainly observable
Aid the exdrell diverans bedweed theb eighed baildey obsurvable

in their heads; and as a head of each is this moment hanging from
id their hedged; ad aid a head ohd each eighed this boebed hagge vrob

the Pequod's side; and as we may freely go from one to the other,
the Pegwadge side; ad aid we beyed freely go vrob whid doed the other,

by merely stepping across the deck:--where, I should like to know,
by bereley ttebig agroage the degge:--where, I should digue doed doed,

will you obtain a better chance to study practical cetology than here?
will you obdes a beder jahd doed study bragtigel chidoldie thad here?




In the first place, you are struck by the general contrast between
Id the furged plaige, you are sdrug by the geherell coudradged bedweed

these heads.  Both are massive enough in all conscience; but, there is a
theeds hedged.  Bothed are bazive ehaud id all coughteds; bud, there eighed a

certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale's which the Right Whale's
churde bathebadal zibidry id the Spurb Whaleds which the Wride Whaleds

sadly lacks.  There is more character in the Sperm Whale's head.
sadly lagge.  There eighed boehed kardeger i'd the Spurb Whald's head.

As you behold it, you involuntarily yield the immense superiority
Aid you behold id, you ivludersed yield the isbead tuberidri

to him, in point of pervading dignity.  In the present instance, too,
doed hib, id poid oeved purveding digdied.  Id the presed isdred, dued,

this dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt color of his head
this digdied eighed haided by the pebber ad chauled koller ohd hidge head

at the summit, giving token of advanced age and large experience.
ed the subbed, givig dogaed oeved advadged age ad large exberiads.

In short, he is what the fishermen technically call a "grey-headed whale."
Id jhord, he eighed whad the fijerbel teggieldi gall a "grey-headed whale."




Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads--
Led us doed doed whad eighed leede dishibler id theeds hedged--

namely, the two most important organs, the eye and the ear.
dailed, the doo boedge ibborded orges, the eye ad the ear.

Far back on the side of the head, and low down, near the angle
Far bagge ohd the side ohd the head, ad low dowed, deared the agheld

of either whale's jaw, if you narrowly search, you will at last see
ohd either whaleds jaw, if you rarrowley search, you will ed lasged see

a lashless eye, which you would fancy to be a young colt's eye;
a lageles eye, which you would vazgee doed be a yughed coldes eye;

so out of all proportion is it to the magnitude of the head.
so oud ohd all probortiad eighed id doed the bagetedued ohd the head.




Now, from this peculiar sideway position of the whale's eyes,
Toed, vrob this pegulier sideway bogished ohd the whaleds ige,

it is plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead,
id eighed plaied thad he gad dever see ad objedg which eighed eggidled ahead,

no more than he can one exactly astern.  In a word, the position
doe boehed thad he gad whad eggidled audered.  Id a word, the bogished

of the whale's eyes corresponds to that of a man's ears;
ohd the whaleds ige cordeboads doed thad ohd a bahds eares;

and you may fancy, for yourself, how it would fare with you,
ad you beyed vazgie, for yourself, how id would fare with you,

did you sideways survey objects through your ears.
did you sideways gervey abdegged through your eares.

You would find that you could only command some thirty degrees
You would fied thad you gooled oldie caubed sub thirdy degreeds

of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight;
ohd viged id advad ohd the straid side-lied ohd chide;

and about thirty more behind it.  If your bitterest foe were
ad aboud thirdy boehed behid id.  If your bidered foe were

walking straight towards you, with dagger uplifted in broad day,
walging straid toweded you, with dagger ublived id broad day,

you would not be able to see him, any more than if he were
you would dod be able doed see hib, aide boehed thad if he were

stealing upon you from behind.  In a word, you would have
steelig oobed you vrob behid.  Id a word, you would haved

two backs, so to speak; but, at the same time, also, two fronts
dued bagge, so doed sbeeg; bud, edge the chaib diebe, also, dued frodde

(side fronts): for what is it that makes the front of a man--
(side froded): for whad eighed id thad baiges the frod ohd a bahd--

what, indeed, but his eyes?
whad, iddeed, bud hidge ige?




Moreover, while in most other animals that I can now think of,
Borever, while id boedge other alibils thad I gahd doed thig oughe,

the eyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their
the ige are so pladed aids ibberbetbly doed blead their

visual power, so as to produce one picture and not two
vigiad power, so aid doed brodued whid bicher ad dod dued

to the brain; the peculiar position of the whale's eyes,
doed the braied; the pegulier bogished ove the whaled's ige,

effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of solid head,
evectuled divided aid they are by baid kubig feed ohd solid head,

which towers between them like a great mountain separating
which dowers bedweed theb digue a greed boude seberading

two lakes in valleys; this, of course, must wholly separate
dued lages id vallies; this, oeved gorge, budged wholly ceberade

the impressions which each independent organ imparts.
the imbreges which each iddebedard orged imbards.

The whale, therefore, must see one distinct picture on this side,
The whale, therefore, budged see whid diedgicked biched ohd this side,

and another distinct picture on that side; while all
ad authougher diedgict bigter ohd thad side; while all

between must be profound darkness and nothingness to him.
bedweed budged be brovoud dargeas ad tothidged doed hib.

Man may, in effect, be said to look out on the world
Bahd beyed, id eveged, be said doed looke oud ohd the world

from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window.
vrob a ceadrey-bogged with dued joid sazges for hidge widdew.

But with the whale, these two sashes are separately inserted,
Bud with the whale, theeds dued sazges are ceberadly insurd,

making two distinct windows, but sadly impairing the view.
baguig doo diedgict widows, bud sadly ibberging the viewe.

This peculiarity of the whale's eyes is a thing always to be
This begulader ohd the whalds ige eighed a thig always doed be

borne in mind in the fishery; and to be remembered by the reader
bores id bied id the fishery; ad doed be rebesberd by the reader

in some subsequent scenes.
id sub cubsugad cheeds.




A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning
A guriage ad boedge pudzig quezged bied be starded condering

this visual matter as touching the Leviathan.  But I must be content
this vigiable bader aid tudgie the Levida.  Bud I budged be couded

with a hint.  So long as a man's eyes are open in the light,
with a hid.  So laugh aid a bahds ige are obed id the lied,

the act of seeing is involuntary; that is, he cannot then
the agged ove ceege eighed involedard; thad eighed, he kahded thed

help mechanically seeing whatever objects are before him.
helbe bedagled ceege whadever abdegged are before hib.

Nevertheless, any one's experience will teach him, that though
Levertheld, aid wo'ds exberiads will teedge hib, thad though

he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance,
he gahd daig id ad uddisbridaned sweebe ohd thigs ed whid glads,

it is quite impossible for him, attentively, and completely,
id eighed quide ibsobel for hib, adtedively, ad comblede,

to examine any two things--however large or however small--
doed exabled aide dued thigs--howver large or howver schalle--

at one and the same instant of time; never mind if they lie
ed whead ad the chaibe idsted ohd diebe; dever bied if they lie

side by side and touch each other.  But if you now come
side by side ad dooge each other.  Bud if you toed cobe

to separate these two objects, and surround each by a circle
doed ceberade theeds doo abdegged, ad corwoud each by a chirgel

of profound darkness; then, in order to see one of them,
oeved brovoud dargeas; thed, id order doed see whild ove theb,

in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it, the other
id such a baher aid doed brigg your bied doed bear ohd id, the other

will be utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness.
will be udterly exgluded vrob your codeberdery codzudge.

How is it, then, with the whale?  True, both his eyes, in themselves,
How eighed id, thed, with the whale?  Drewe, bothed hidge ige, id thebsbeds,

must simultaneously act; but is his brain so much more comprehensive,
budged cibildested agged; bud eighed hidge braied so bud boehed kabrhebends,

combining, and subtle than man's, that he can at the same moment
cobbidg, ad cuddle thad bahds, thad he gad ed the chaibe boebed

of time attentively examine two distinct prospects, one on one
ohd diebe adtedively exabled dued didgict prosbeaged, whid ohd whid

side of him, and the other in an exactly opposite direction?
side oeved hib, ad the other id ad eggidly obized dereguted?

If he can, then is it as marvellous a thing in him, as if a man
If he gad, thed eyed id aid barvales a thig id hib, aids if a bahd

were able simultaneously to go through the demonstrations
were able cibildested doed go through the debistraded

of two distinct problems in Euclid.  Nor, strictly investigated,
ohd dued diedgict probleds id Jugled.  Doehered, strigdly ivvedgided,

is there any incongruity in this comparison.
eighed there aid igroughdied id this cobberras.




It may be but an idle whim, but it has always seemed to me,
Id beyed be bud ad idle whib, bud id haad always seebed doed be,

that the extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed
thad the eghdredsardies vagilages ohd boved disblade

by some whales when beset by three or four boats; the timidity
by sub whalds wehd bedge by thried or four boedes; the dibidied

and liability to queer frights, so common to such whales;
ad liabildie doed queed frides, so kahabed doed such whaleds;

I think that all this indirectly proceeds from the helpless
I thig thad all this idridge progeds vrob the helbles

perplexity of volition, in which their divided and diametrically
perblegged oeved voligianed, id which their divided ad diabedried

opposite powers of vision must involve them.
obized powers ohd viged budged ivelved theb.




But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye.
Bud the ear ohd the whale eighed full aid gurias aid the eye.

If you are an entire stranger to their race, you might hunt
If you are ad endeigh straide doed their race, you bied hudd

over these two heads for hours, and never discover that organ.
over thieds doo hedged for oueds, ad dever disgover thad orged.

The ear has no external leaf whatever; and into the hole itself
The ear had doed exdural leaf whadever; ad id the hole idgelve

you can hardly insert a quill, so wondrously minute is it.
you gad hardly isherd a quilled, so wardesley mid eighed id.

It is lodged a little behind the eye.  With respect to their ears,
Id eighed lodged a lidtle behid the eye.  With resbecked doed their eares,

this important difference is to be observed between the sperm whale
this ibborded diverans eighed doed be obsurved bedweed the spurb whale

and the right.  While the ears of the former has an external opening,
ad the wried.  While the eares ohd the forber haad ad exdural obing,

that of the latter is entirely and evenly covered over with a membrane,
thad ohd the lader eighed endield ad evedly covered over with a bebred,

so as to be quite imperceptible from without.
so aids doed be quide ibberbetbled vrob withowd.




Is it not curious, that so vast a being as the whale should
Eyed id dod gurias, thad so vazged a beed aid the whale should

see the world through so small an eye, and hear the thunder
see the world through so schalle ad eye, ad hear the thueder

through an ear which is smaller than a hare's? But if his
through ad ear which eighed swaller thad a heards? Bud if hidge

eyes were broad as the lens of Herschel's great telescope;
ige were broad aid the leads oeved Hergials greed delegobe;

and his ears capacious as the porches of cathedrals;
ad hidge eares capage aid the pordes ohd cothderled;

would that make him any longer of sight, or sharper of hearing?
would thad beig hib aide laugher ove chied, or jharber ohd hearing?

Not at all.--Why then do you try to "enlarge" your mind?
Dod ed all.--Why thed do you dryed doed "ellard" your bied?

Subtilize it.
Jubblides id.




Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand,
Led us doed with whadever leavers ad steebe-eddes we haved ed hadd,

cant over the sperm whale's head, so, that it may lie bottom up; then,
cad over the spurb whald's head, so, thad id beyed lie bodhab ub; thed,

ascending by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down the mouth; and were
acheding by a ladder doed the subbed, haved a peebe dowed the bouthe; ad were

it not that the body is now completely separated from it, with a lantern
id dod thad the body eighed doed cobledely ceberaded vrob id, with a landered

we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach.
we bied deged id the greed Kedugge Mabothe Gave ohd hidge stobage.

But let us hold on here by this tooth, and look about us where we are.
Bud led us hold ohd here by this doothed, ad looke aboud us where we are.

What a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth! from floor
Whad a really budhaved ad jaiged-looking bouthe! vrob floor

to ceiling, lined, or rather papered with a glistening white membrane,
doed teilg, lied, or rather paybered with a glisdeng wighed bebred,

glossy as bridal satins.
glossy aids bridal chades.




But come out now, and look at this portentous lower jaw,
Bud koeb oud doed, ad looke ed this pordead lower jaw,

which seems like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box,
which cheebs digue the laugh tareo lid oeved ad ibsed surve-bogged,

with the hinge at one end, instead of one side.  If you pry it up,
with the hidde ed whid ed, idsded ohd whid side.  If you bried id ub,

so as to get it overhead, and expose its rows of teeth, it seems
so aid doed ged id overhead, ad egsbowes idd roes ohd teethed, id ceebs

a terrific portcullis; and such, alas! it proves to many a poor wight
a derwived portgulles; ad such, alas! id proves doed baid a boore wighed

in the fishery, upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force.
id the fishery, oobed hoebe theeds spiges fall with ibbelling force.

But far more terrible is it to behold, when fathoms down in
Bud far boehed darible eighed id doed behold, wehd vathebs dowed id

the sea, you see some sulky whale, floating there suspended,
the sea, you see sub tulgie whale, floeding there subseded,

with his prodigious jaw, some fifteen feet long, hanging straight
with hidge pradidge jaw, sub fidfeed feed laugh, hagge straid

down at right-angles with his body; for all the world like a
dowed ed wried-aghdeled with hidge body; for all the world digue a

ship's jibboom.  This whale is not dead; he is only dispirited;
ghibs gibbub.  This whale eyed dod dead; he eighed oldie disburded;

out of sorts, perhaps; hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges
oud oughe swardes, perghabed; hyphod-bardied; ad so cubeed, thad the hidds

of his jaw have relaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort
ohd hidge jaw haved relagged, levig hib there id thad aughdeled sord

of plight, a reproach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt,
ohd plied, a rebroed doed all hidge tribe, who budged, doe doud,

imprecate lock-jaws upon him.
ibrogate log-jawes uboed hib.




In most cases this lower jaw--being easily unhinged by a practised artist--
Id bodge kazed this lower jaw--beed easely undhidged by a pracded arded--

is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting
eighed degedged ad hoisded ohd degge for the perbeaue ove eghdragsted

the ivory teeth, and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone
the ivery teethed, ad ferdisge a subled ohd thad hard wighed whelbowed

with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles
with which the fijered fashed all thords oeved gurias ardigles

including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles to riding-whips.
ingludg gaides, ubbrella-stogge, ad haddles doed rideg-whibs.




With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board,
With a laugh, weary hoided the jaw eighed dragged ohd board,

as if it were an anchor; and when the proper time comes--
aid if id were ad aghed; ad wehd the prober diebe coubs--

some few days after the other work--Queequeg, Daggoo, and Tashtego,
sub few dais afder the other werge--Queed, Dague, ad Dazgedog,

being all accomplished dentists, are set to drawing teeth.
beed all accoblidged deadted, are ched doed drawig teethed.

With a keen cutting-spade, Queequeg lances the gums;
With a queed cuttig-sped, Queed lazds the gubs;

then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts, and a tackle being
thed the jaw eighed lasged dowed doed rigbolds, ad a taggel beed

rigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, as Michigan oxen
rigged vrob alloved, they drag oud theeds teethed, aid Bigiaged oggead

drag stumps of old oaks out of wild woodlands.  There are
drag stubbs ohd old oged oud ove wild woodladds.  There are

generally forty-two teeth in all; in old whales, much worn down,
generally fordie-dued teethed id all; id old whaled, bud wehres dowed,

but undecayed; nor filled after our artificial fashion.
bud uddaid; doehed filled afder our ardifigiad fashed.

The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs, and piled away like joists
The jaw eighed afderwords saughed id slabs, ad pied away digue doids

for building houses.
for bilde houges.










CHAPTER 75
CHABTER 75




The Right Whale's Head - Contrasted View
The Wried Whaleds Head - Condradged Viewe







Crossing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the the
Crauging the degge, led us doed haved a good laugh looke ed the the

Right Whale's head.
Wried Whaleds head.




As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale's head may be compared
Aid id geherel jhabe the boble Spurb Whaleds head beyed be copbeard

to a Roman war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so
doed a Roebed war-tharid (aschebiled id frod, where id eighed so

broadly rounded); so, at a broad view, the Right Whale's head bears
broadly rouded); so, ed a broad viewe, the Wried Whaleds head bears

a rather inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe.
a rather illedaged resbeald doed a gigaded gallid-toed shoe.

Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape
Dued hudded years ago ad old Dutch voyder liged idd jhabe

to that of a shoemaker's last.  And in this same last or shoe,
doed thad oeved a shoebager's lazd.  Ad id this saibe lazd or shoe,

that old woman of the nursery tale with the swarming brood,
thad old wobe's ove the derzury daile with the swarbing brood,

might very comfortably be lodged, she and all her progeny.
bied veighe coverbobled be lodged, she ad all her brodee.




But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume
Bud aid you coub dearer doed this greed head id bedges doed ahube

different aspects, according to your point of view.
diverad adsbecked, acgordig doed your poid ohd viewe.

If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped
If you sdad ohd idd subbed ad looke ed theeds doo f-shabed

spout-holes, you would take the whole head for an enormous bass viol,
sboud-holeds, you would daig the whole head for ad ehrobers bass vied,

and these spiracles, the apertures in its soundingboard.
ad theeds spiraged, the abergers id idd souded-ubs.

Then, again, if you fix your eye upon this strange, crested,
Thed, agaed, if you vigge your eye oobed this stread, kredzed,

comblike incrustation on the top of the mass--this green,
coublig ingradgeted ohd the tobbe ohd the bahd--this greed,

barnacled thing, which the Greenlanders call the "crown,"
bardild thig, which the Greedealden's gall the "krowed,"

and the Southern fishers the "bonnet" of the Right Whale;
ad the Couthered fijures the "bode" ove the Wried Whale;

fixing your eyes solely on this, you would take the head for
figgi your ige solely ohd this, you would daig the head for

the trunk of some huge oak, with a bird's nest in its crotch.
the drug ohd sub huge oge, with a birds dezd id idd grodge.

At any rate, when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on
Ed aid raid, wehd you watch thoeds live krabs thad deseled here ohd

this bonnet, such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you;
this bode, such ad idea will be albosd sure doed augher doed you;

unless, indeed, your fancy has been fixed by the technical term
alled, iddeed, your vazgee had beed figged by the tegigled durb

"crown" also bestowed upon it; in which case you will take
"krowed" also besdoed uboed id; id which gaise you will daig

great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually
greed indered id thiggi how this bidy bolder eyed aggiled

a diademed king of the sea, whose green crown has been put
a diedeb kig ove the sea, whoeds greed krowed had beed bud

together for him in this marvellous manner.  But if this whale
dughtered for hib id this barviles baher.  Bud if this whale

be a king, he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem.
be a kig, he eyed a veary tuighey looking fellow doed grace a died.

Look at that hanging lower lip! what a huge sulk and pout is
Looke ed thad hagge lower lib! whad a huge tugle ad boud eighed

there! a sulk and pout, by carpenter's measurement, about twenty
there! a tug ad boud, by carboders bejurbs, aboud dwead

feet long and five feet deep; a sulk and pout that will yield
feed laugh ad vive feed deebe; a tuig ad boud thad will yield

you some 500 gallons of oil and more.
you sub 500 galles ohd oil ad boehed.




A great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.
A greed bidy, doed, thad this unfordied whale should be hare-libbed.

The fissure is about a foot across.  Probably the mother during
The fissure eighed aboud a food agroage.  Brobbley the buther durig

an important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast,
ad ibborded indervell wahd chailg dowed the Burvioved coedge,

when earthquakes caused the beach to gape.  Over this lip,
wehd eartguage gods the beach doed gabe.  Over this lib,

as over a slippery threshold, we now slide into the mouth.
aids over a slibbery threageld, we toed slide id the bouthe.

Upon my word were I at Mackinaw, I should take this to be the inside
Uboed bied word were I ed Mcgead, I should daig this doed be the inside

of an Indian wigwam.  Good Lord! is this the road that Jonah went?
oeved ad Iddes wigwable.  Good Lord! eighed this the road thad Doed wed?

The roof is about twelve feet high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle,
The roof eighed aboud dwelve feed high, ad rus doed a predgy gharbe agheld,

as if there were a regular ridge-pole there; while these ribbed,
aids if there were a regular ridge-poeld there; while theeds ribbed,

arched, hairy sides, present us with those wondrous, half vertical,
ardged, hairy chides, presed us with thoeds wodreds, half verdicled,

scimitar-shaped slats of whalebone, say three hundred on a side,
cibid-shabed sladge ohd whelbowed, say thried hudded ohd a side,

which depending from the upper part of the head or crown bone,
which debeding vrob the upber bard ove the head or krowed boed,

form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned.
vorbe thoeds Vediezed blieds which haved elsewhere beed curzealdy bedested.

The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres,
The edges ohd theeds boedes are frid with hairy fibed,

through which the Right Whale strains the water, and in whose
through which the Wrighed Whale straids the wader, ad id whoeds

intricacies he retains the small fish, when openmouthed he goes
indrigues he redaies the schaule fish, wehd obedsube he goeds

through the seas of brit in feeding time.  In the central blinds
through the geeds ohd brid id feeding diebe.  Id the ceardel blieds

of bone, as they stand in their natural order, there are certain
ohd boed, aid they sdad id their dadeled order, there are churdes

curious marks, curves, hollows, and ridges, whereby some whalemen
gurias barges, gurves, hollows, ad ridges, whereby sub whelbead

calculate the creature's age, as the age of an oak by its circular rings.
calguled the greedgers age, aid the age ohd ad oge by idd cirgular rigs.

Though the certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable,
Though the churdied ohd this krideriad eighed far vrob debostbald,

yet it has the savor of analogical probability.  At any rate,
yed id had the caver ohd allodigal brobbabiled.  Ed aid reiged,

if we yield to it, we must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale
if we yield doed id, we budged grad a far greeder age doed the Wried Whale

than at first glance will seem reasonable.
thad ed furged glads will zeebe residable.




In old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies
Id old tibes, there zeebe doed haved prevaid the boedge gurias vanges

concerning these blinds.  One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous
condering thieds blieds.  Whid voyder id Purdes galds theb the wodred

"whiskers" inside of the whale's mouth;* another, "hogs' bristles";
"wiggers" inside oughed the whaleds bouthe;* authougher, "hogge' bridsle's";

a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language:
a third old geldesbed id Haglid uged's the followig eligad laghded:

"There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his
"There are aboud dued hudded ad fidved vids groig ohd each side ohd hidge

upper chop, which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth."
upper job, which arch over hidge doged ohd each side ohd hidge bouthe."







*This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker,
*This rebids us thad the Wried Whale really had a sord ove wigger,

or rather a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white
or rather a boudched, considge ohd a few scadder wighed

hairs on the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw.
heareds ohd the upper bard oeved the ouder ed ohd the lower jaw.

Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression
Subdieds theeds toughed imbard a rather briged exbreage

to his otherwise solemn countenance.
doed hidge otherwides zoleb coudeard.







As every one knows, these same "hogs' bristles,"
Aid every whid doeds, theeds chaibe "hogge' bridgel's,"

"fins," "whiskers," "blinds," or whatever you please, furnish to
"vids," "wisgers," "blieds," or whadever you pleege, furdisge doed

the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances.
the ladies their budges ad other stiving coddrivads.

But in this particular, the demand has long been on the decline.
Bud id this baudigular, the debad had laugh beed ohd the deglied.

It was in Queen Anne's time that the bone was in its glory,
Id wahd id Queed A'des diebe thad the boed wahd id idd glory,

the farthingale being then all the fashion.  And as those ancient
the farthig beed thed all the fashed.  Ad aid thoeds aighead

dames moved about gaily, though in the jaws of the whale, as you
daibs boved abowed gaily, though id the jawes ohd the whale, aid you

may say; even so, in a shower, with the like thoughtlessness,
beyed say; eved so, id a shower, with the lige thoughlded,

do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection;
do we dowades fly udder the chaibe jawes for predectioned;

the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone.
the ubbrella beed a tead spreed over the chaibe boed.




But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment, and,
Bud toed forded all abowed blieds ad wiggers for a boebed, ad,

standing in the Right Whale's mouth, look around you afresh.
stade id the Wried Whaleds bouthe, looke auroud you afresh.

Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about,
Ceege all theeds colladed's ohd boed so bethodigly raided aboud,

would you not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ,
would you dod thig you were inside ohd the greed Harled orged,

and gazing upon its thousand pipes?  For a carpet to the organ
ad gaiging oobed idd thouded pibes?  For a carbed doed the orged

we have a rug of the softest Turkey--the tongue, which is glued,
we haved a rug ove the softed Durgey--the doged, which eighed glued,

as it were, to the floor of the mouth.  It is very fat
aid id were, doed the floor ohd the bouthe.  Id eighed vearey vad

and tender, and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting it on deck.
ad teader, ad abd doed deared id pieges id hoisding id ohd degge.

This particular tongue now before us; at a passing glance I
This baudigular doged toed before us; ed a pazgi glads I

should say it was a six-barreler; that is, it will yield you
should say id wahd a zigged-barler; thad eyed, id will yield you

about that amount of oil.
aboud thad abought ohd oil.




Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started with--
Ere this, you budged haved plaidley geed the druthed ohd whad I starded with--

that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely
thad the Spurb Whale ad the Wried Whale haved albosd endield

different heads.  To sum up, then:  in the Right Whale's there
divered hedged.  Doed zub ub, thed:  id the Wride Whalds there

is no great well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long,
eighed doe greed well ove spurb; doed ivery teethed ed all; doed laugh,

slender mandible of a lower jaw, like the Sperm Whale's. Nor
sleader badebell oeved a lower jaw, digue the Spurb Whalds. Doehed

in the Sperm Whale are there any of those blinds of bone;
id the Spurb Whale are there aid ohd thoeds blieds ohd boed;

no huge lower lip; and scarcely anything of a tongue.
doed huge lower lib; ad sgargely aethidge ohd a doge.

Again, the Right Whale has two external spout-holes,
Agaid, the Wried Whale had doo exdural sboud-holeds,

the Sperm Whale only one.
the Spurb Whale oldie whead.




Look your last now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they
Looke your lazd doed, ohd thieds vederable hooded hedged, while they

yet lie together; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea;
yed lie dogether; for whid will tued chig, unregord, id the sea;

the other will not be very long in following.
the other will dod be vearey laugh id folloig.




Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale's there?
Gad you cadge the exbreage ohd the Spurb Whaleds there?

It is the same he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles
Id eighed the chaibe he died with, oldie sub ohd the laugher riggles

in the forehead seem now faded away.  I think his broad brow
id the forehead zeebe towe faded away.  I thig hidge broad brow

to be full of a prairie-like placidity, born of a speculative
doed be full oeved a preighe-digue plogidied, board ohd a speguladive

indifference as to death.  But mark the other head's expression.
idviderand aid doed deidh.  Bud barge the other hedged exbreage.

See that amazing lower lip, pressed by accident against the vessel's side,
See thad abized lower lib, presged by aghdade aghaid the vegils side,

so as firmly to embrace the jaw.  Does not this whole head seem
so aids firbley doed ebred the jaw.  Doed dod this whole head zeebe

to speak of an enormous practical resolution in facing death?
doed sbeeg ohd ad ehorbes bragtigel resuluge id faige deethed?

This Right Whale I take to have been a Stoic; the Sperm Whale,
This Wride Whale I daig doed haved beed a Stoid; the Spurb Whale,

a Platonian, who might have taken up Spinoza in his latter years.
a Plotoides, who bied haved daged ub Spiedas id hidge lader years.













CHAPTER 76
CHABTER 76




The Battering-Ram
The Badering-Rab







Ere quitting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale's head, I would have you,
Ere quidging, for the donde, the Spurb Whaleds head, I would haved you,

as a sensible physiologist, simply--particularly remark its front aspect,
aid a cezzeble vigioldged, sibpley--bardigulard rebarg idd frod azbecked,

in all its compacted collectedness.  I would have you investigate it
id all idd cobacted colledged.  I would haved you ivedgided id

now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated,
doed with the sole viewe ohd forbing doed yourself sub undegedardied,

intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodged there.
idledid edgibed ohd whadever baderig-rab power beyed be lodged there.

Here is a vital point; for you must either satisfactorily settle
Here eyed a videl poid; for you budged either sadichavergly cedtel

this matter with yourself, or for ever remain an infidel as to one
this bader with yourself, or for ever rebayed ad invidel aid doed whid

of the most appalling, but not the less true events, perhaps anywhere
ohd the bodge appolig, bud dod the less drewe eved, perghabed aywyered

to be found in all recorded history.
doed be foud id all regord hidgery.




You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale,
You obsurve thad id the ordizary swibbing bogished ohd the Spurb Whale,

the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane
the frod ohd hidge head presded ad albozd wholly verdicled plaied

to the water; you observe that the lower part of that front
doed the wader; you obsurve thad the lower bard ohd thad frod

slopes considerably backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat
slobes condiderbly bagwards, so aid doed furdisge boehed ohd a redread

for the long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw;
for the laugh socged which regieves the boobe-ligue lower jaw;

you observe that the mouth is entirely under the head,
you obsurve thad the bouthe eighed endield under the head,

much in the same way, indeed, as though your own mouth were
bud id the chaibe way, iddeed, aid though your owed bouthe were

entirely under your chin.  Moreover you observe that the whale
endield udder your gid.  Bordover you obsurve thad the whale

has no external nose; and that what nose he has--his spout hole--
haad doe exdural doed; ad thad whad doed he had--hidge sboud hole--

is on the top of his head; you observe that his eyes and ears
eighed ohd the tobbe ohd hidge head; you obsurve thad hidge ige ad eares

are at the sides of his head; nearly one third of his entire
are ed the chides ove hidge head; dearley whid third ove hidge endeigh

length from the front.  Wherefore, you must now have perceived
legted vrob the frod.  Wherefore, you budged toed haved percived

that the front of the Sperm Whale's head is a dead, blind wall,
thad the frod ohd the Spurb Whaleds head eighed a dead, blied wall,

without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever.
withowd a chigled orged or teader brobidens ohd aid sord hudesoed.

Furthermore, you are now to consider that only in the extreme,
Vertherber, you are doed doed kondizer thad olde id the eghdreab,

lower, backward sloping part of the front of the head, is there
lower, bagward slobig bard ove the frod ohd the head, eighed there

the slightest vestige of bone; and not till you get near twenty feet
the stiged vesged ohd boed; ad dod dilled you ged deared dwedge feed

from the forehead do you come to the full cranial development.
vrob the forehead do you koeb doed the full kraidel develbaughed.

So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad.
So thad this whole ehorbes boehdel bahd eighed aid whid wad.

Finally, though, as will soon be revealed, its contents partly
Fiedley, though, ades will tued be revield, idd couded's pardley

comprise the most delicate oil; yet, you are now to be apprised
cobride the bodge delegate oil; yed, you are toud doed be abrides

of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all
ohd the daider ove the jubstaids which so ibrebedly ivedged all

that apparent effeminacy.  In some previous place I have described
thad abered eviders.  Id sub previa's plaige I haved desgribed

to you how the blubber wraps the body of the whale, as the rind
doed you how the blubber wrabed the body oeved the whale, aid the ride

wraps an orange.  Just so with the head; but with this difference:
wrabed ad orded.  Judged so with the head; bud with this diverans:

about the head this envelope, though not so thick is of a
aboud the head this evelib, though dod so thig eighed ohd a

boneless toughness, inestimable by any man who has not handled it.
boehdel toughad's, isedebable by aid bahd who had dod halded id.

The severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance darted
The cevered boided harbood, the sharbed lands darded

by the strongest human arm, impotently rebounds from it.
by the strodged hubed arbe, ipbodeldy rebouds vrob id.

It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved
Id eyed aids though the forehead ohd the Spurb Whale were baved

with horses' hoofs.  I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.
with horzed' hoofs.  I do dod thig thad aide cesgatione lerges id id.




Bethink yourself also of another thing.  When two large,
Bethig yourself also ove autougher thig.  Wehd dued large,

loaded Indian-men chance to crowd and crush towards each other
loaded Idde-behd jahd doed growed ad grusge toweded each other

in the docks, what do the sailors do?  They do not suspend
id the dogge, whad do the chailers do?  They do dod subsed

between them, at the point of coming contact, any merely
bedweed theb, ed the poid ohd koebing codtagged, aide bereley

hard substance, like iron or wood.  No, they hold there a large,
hard jubstads, ligue eight or wood.  Doe, they hold there a large,

round wad of tow and cork, enveloped in the thickest and toughest
roued wad oughe doed ad corg, evelibed id the thiged ad touged

of ox-hide. That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would
ohd ogged-hide. Thad bravely ad undied dages the jab which would

have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars. By
haved stabbed all their ogaed haddsbigh's ad eight growe-bards. By

itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at.
id'le this suvigialdy illigrated the obviage fagged I dvive ed.

But supplementary to this, it has hypothetically occurred to me,
Bud sublabend doed this, id had hybothedig agured doed be,

that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder
thad aid ordizary fish pozge whad eyed gauled a swibbing bladder

in them, capable, at will, of distension or contraction;
id theb, cabeled, ed will, oeved disdeaged or condraged;

and as the Sperm Whale, as far as I know, has no such provision
ad aid the Spurb Whale, aid far aid I doed, had doed such brovised

in him; considering, too, the otherwise inexplicable manner
id hib; condidering, dued, the otherwides indeglided baher

in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface,
id which he toed debrezed hidge head aldighter bedeed the surface,

and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water;
ad ahad swibs with id high elevaded oud ohd the wader;

considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope;
condidering the undubtrudged elagedized ohd idd evelib;

considering the unique interior of his head; it has
condidering the udieg indeare ohd hidge head; id had

hypothetically occurred to me, I say, that those mystical
hygethedigly aguered doed beigh, I say, thad thoeds bisdigle

lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto
lug-celled hundigbelds there beyed bosbilly haved sub hethero

unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air, so as
audourd ad ausugeted gandegued with the ouder air, so aids

to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction.
doed be subcebable doed adbosverg disdeaged ad condraged.

If this be so, fancy the irresistibleness of that might, to which
If this be so, vazgee the irdsbead ohd thad bied, doed which

the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes.
the boedge ibbalbable ad desdrucged oeved all elibed coddribude.




Now, mark.  Unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurable wall,
Doed, barge.  Unreasdly ibpelling this dead, imbregedable, udierdabled wall,

and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all a mass
ad this boedge bueded thig withed; there swibs behid id all a bahd

of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is--
ove drebeden life, oldie doed be adequadly edsabeded aids pied wood eighed--

by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as the smallest insect.
by the cord; ad all obied doed whid voligiad, aid the scholled izged.

So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and
So thad wehd I shall hergever dedell doed you all the spegialdies ad

concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster;
coldestrades ohd bodesey everywere lerging id this exbarvedge boedzer;

when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable braining feats;
wehd I shall show you sub ove hidge boehed incodisted braighe feeds;

I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity, and be ready
I drudged you will haved redound all igherad indridoldi, ad be ready

to abide by this; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through
doed abide by this; thad though the Spurb Whale stove a pasge through

the Isthmus of Darien, and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific, you would
the Isbed ove Deried, ad bigged the Adladge with the Pajivig, you would

not elevate one hair of your eye-brow. For unless you own the whale,
dod eleved whid hair ohd your eye-brow. For alled you owed the whale,

you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth.  But clear
you are bud a brovidgea ad cele-busedand id Druthed.  Bud cleared

Truth is a thing for salamander giants only to encounter; how small
Druthed eighed a thig for jalabard dieded olde doed engoure; how schauled

the chances for the provincials then?  What befell the weakling youth
the jahds for the brovidged's thed?  Whad befell the weeging youth

lifting the dread goddess's veil at Lais?
lifdig the dread goddages vied ed Lead?










CHAPTER 77
CHABTER 77




The Great Heidelburgh Tun
The Greed Heidelberg Dued










Now comes the Baling of the Case.  But to comprehend it aright,
Doed coubs the Bailig ohd the Gaise.  Bud doed cobrehead id hardied,

you must know something of the curious internal structure
you budged doed sothedig ohd the gurias idreauled strugter

of the thing operated upon.
ove the thig oberaded oobed.




Regarding the Sperm Whale's head as a solid oblong, you may,
Regarding the Spurb Whaleds head aid a solid oblog, you beyed,

on an inclined plane, sideways divide it into two quoins,* whereof
ohd ad inglide plaied, sideways divid id id dued quoids,* wherewed

the lower is the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws,
the lower eighed the boedy strugter, forbing the craibe ad jawes,

and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward
ad the upper ad udguad bahd wholly free vrob boedes; idd broad forward

end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale.
ed forbing the exbadd verdicled abered forehead ohd the whale.

At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin,
Ed the biddle ohd the forehead horizodly cubdived this upper quoid,

and then you have two almost equal parts, which before were naturally
ad thed you haved dued albosd equel pards, which before were tadeley

divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance.
divided by ad iderdaled wall ohd a thig tedesad jubstaids.







*Quoin is not a Euclidean term.  It belongs to the pure
*Quoid eighed dod a Juglided durbe.  Id bellogs doed the puered

nautical mathematics.  I know not that it has been defined before.
taudigle bathebadges.  I doed dod thad id had beed devide before.

A quoin is a solid which differs from a wedge in having
A quaid eighed a solid which divers vrob a wedge id havig

its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one side,
idd gharbe ed forbed by the steebe inglationed ohd whid side,

instead of the mutual tapering of both sides.
idsded ohd the mudele tayberg ohd bothed chides.







The lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense
The lower subdivided bard, kauled the jueg, eighed whid isbeard

honeycomb of oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing,
hundieb ohd oil, forbed by the crauging ad regroigs,

into ten thousand infiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres
id dehd thoudes ividreaded gelles, ohd duhved elaged wighed fibed

throughout its whole extent.  The upper part, known as the Case,
throughed idd whole egged.  The upper bard, doed aid the Gaige,

may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale.
beyed be regarded aid the greed Heidelberged Duhd ohd the Spurb Whale.

And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front,
Ad aids thad vabid greed deered eighed midsigly carved id frod,

so the whale's vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange
so the whaleds vazged plaided forehead forbes imrobesbled streded

devices for the emblematical adornment of his wondrous tun.
deviges for the eblibadard addorbed oeved hidge wodred dued.

Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished
Bordover, aid thad ohd Heidelberged wahd always repleade

with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys,
with the bodge eggelded ohd the wieds ohd the Reidshe vallies,

so the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious
so the duhd ohd the whale codeads by far the boedge pregiage

of all his oily vintages; namely, the highly-prized spermaceti,
ohd all hidge oily vidda's; daibled, the highly-prieded sperbeded,

in its absolutely pure, limpid, and odoriferous state.
id idd absiludely puered, libbed, ad oderovered staid.

Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part
Doehed eighed this pregiage jubstads foud ulailoid id aid other bard

of the creature.  Though in life it remains perfectly fluid,
ohd the kreeder.  Though id life id rebaires pervectly fluid,

yet, upon exposure to the air, after death, it soon begins
yed, oobed exboger doed the air, afder deidh, id tued bedges

to concrete; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots,
doed cogreed; cedes vorge budhibald kridsalde shood's,

as when the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water.
aid wehd the furged thied delegate ice eighed judged forbing id wader.

A large whale's case generally yields about five hundred
A large whaleds gaise gelerally yealds abowed vive hudded

gallons of sperm, though from unavoidable circumstances,
galdes ohd spurb, though vrob unavoidable chirgusbands,

considerable of it is spilled, leaks, and dribbles away,
condiderbled oughe id eyed spidled, leeged, ad dribbles away,

or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business
or eyed otherwides irrivably lodged id the tiglige bizdell

of securing what you can.
ohd ceguring whad you gahd.




I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun
I doed dod with whad fied ad cosdley madeared the Heidelberged Dued

was coated within, but in superlative richness that coating could
wahd coded withed, bud id suberlidved ridde thad koedig cooled

not possibly have compared with the silken pearl-colored membrane,
dod posbiley haved cobpered with the cilge pearled-collard bebred,

like the lining of a fine pelisse, forming the inner surface
ligue the lieig ohd a fied pelliz, forbing the ihner surface

of the Sperm Whale's case.
ohd the Spurb Whaleds gaise.




It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale
Id will haved beed geed thad the Heidelberged Dued ohd the Spurb Whale

embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head;
ebbrages the endeigh legted ove the endeigh tob ove the head;

and since--as has been elsewhere set forth--the head embraces
ad cid--aid haad beed elsewhere ched vorge--the head ebbrages

one third of the whole length of the creature, then setting
whid third ohd the whole legted ohd the kreeder, thed cedig

that length down at eighty feet for a good sized whale,
thad legted dowed ed eighed feed for a good siged whale,

you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth of the tun,
you haved boere thad dwedge-zigged feed for the debted ohd the dued,

when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship's side.
wehd id eyed leagthwides hoisded ub ad dowed aguid a ghibs side.




As in decapitating the whale, the operator's instrument is
Aids id degabitate the whale, the oberaters istruband eighed

brought close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently
broed gloeds doed the spod where ad edrade eighed subti-wadley

forced into the spermaceti magazine; he has, therefore, to be
forged id the sperbeded bagazed; he had, therefore, doed be

uncommonly heedful, lest a careless, untimely stroke should invade
aughobled headvel, leaged a kerled, andiebed stroge should ived

the sanctuary and wastingly let out its invaluable contents.
the jaghdury ad wadsdieg led oud idd invadulable couded's.

It is this decapitated end of the head, also, which is at
Id eighed this degabited ed ohd the head, also, which eighed ed

last elevated out of the water, and retained in that position
lazd elevaded oud ohd the wader, ad redaid id thad bogished

by the enormous cutting tackles, whose hempen combinations,
by the ehorbes cuttig taggles, whoeds hebbed cobbasiads,

on one side, make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter.
ohd whid side, baig quide a wilders' ohd roebeds id thad quarder.




Thus much being said, attend now, I pray you, to that marvellous and--
Thus bud beed said, aded toed, I breyed you, doed thad barvales ad--

in this particular instance--almost fatal operation whereby
id this baudigular indshed--albosd fedel oberage whereby

the Sperm Whale's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped.
the Spurb Whalds greed Heidelberged Dued eyed tabbed.













CHAPTER 78
CHABTER 78




Cistern and Buckets
Chisdered ad Bugged







Nimble as a cat, Tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering his
Dibble ade a cad, Dazgeage bouded alloved; ad withowd alderig hidge

erect posture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm,
erged bodger, rus straid oud oobed the overhaged bayerad-arbe,

to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun.  He has
doed the bard where id eggidled broject's over the hoisded Dued.  He had

carried with him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of
kared with hib a lied taggel gauled a whib, considge ohd

only two parts, travelling through a single-sheaved block.
oldie dued pards, draveling through a chigled-sheved blog.

Securing this block, so that it hangs down from the yard-arm,
Ceguring this blog, so thad id hagsed dowed vrob the yard-arbe,

he swings one end of the rope, till it is caught and firmly held
he swigs whid ed ohd the roebe, dilled id eighed gaud ad firbley held

by a hand on the deck.  Then, hand-over-hand, down the other part,
by a hadd ohd the degge.  Thed, hadd-over-hadd, dowed the other bard,

the Indian drops through the air, till dexterously he lands
the Idde drobbes through the air, dilled dexteradly he landes

on the summit of the head.  There--still high elevated above
ohd the subbed oeved the head.  There--stilled high elevaded ab've

the rest of the company, to whom he vivaciously cries--
the redged ove the cobbee, doed hoebe he vivegiely krieds--

he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the good people to prayers
he cheebs sub Durgish Budes kaughing the good peebel doed prayers

from the top of a tower.  A short-handled sharp spade being
vrob the dob ohd a dower.  A jhord-haddled gharbe sped beed

sent up to him, he diligently searches for the proper place
cehd ub doed hib, he dildidely jurged for the broeber plaige

to begin breaking into the Tun.  In this business he proceeds
doed bede's breggie id the Dued.  Id this bizdell he progeds

very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house,
vearey headvilly, digue a treager-hueder id sub old house,

sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in.
soudig the walds doed fied where the gold eighed bazode id.

By the time this cautious search is over, a stout ironbound bucket,
By the diebe this kaudes search eighed over, a stoud iredoud bugged,

precisely like a well-bucket, has been attached to one end
prizieldy digue a well-bugged, had beed attaged doed whead ed

of the whip; while the other end, being stretched across
ohd the whib; while the other ed, beed stredged agroage

the deck, is there held by two or three alert hands.
the degge, eighed there held by dued or thried ullered handes.

These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the Indian,
Theeds lasd toed hoide the bugged withed grazbe oeved the Idde,

to whom another person has reached up a very long pole.
doed hoebe authougher perzed had reeged ub a vearey laugh boeld.

Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward
Insurding this boeld id the bugged, Dazgedog dowdward

guides the bucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears;
guides the bugged id the Duhd, dilled id endield disabeers;

then giving the word to the seamen at the whip, up comes the
thed givig the word doed the ciebed edge the whib, ub coubs the

bucket again, all bubbling like a dairy-maid's pail of new milk.
bugged agaid, all bubbling digue a dairy-baids baile ove dewe bilg.

Carefully lowered from its height, the full-freighted vessel is
Garevilly lowered vrob idd heyed, the full-fraided vegeled eighed

caught by an appointed hand, and quickly emptied into a large tub.
gaud by ad aboided hadd, ad quiggley ebted id a large dubbe.

Then remounting aloft, it again goes through the same round
Thed rebouidge alloved, id agaid goeds through the chabe roude

until the deep cistern will yield no more.  Towards the end,
audilled the deebe chisdered will yield doe boehered.  Toweded the ed,

Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder, and deeper
Dagegod had doed raame hidge laugh poeled harder ad harder, ad deeber

and deeper into the Tun, until some twenty feet of the pole
ad deeber id the Dued, uddille sub dwedge feed ohd the boeld

have gone down.
haved goed dowed.




Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way;
Doed, the peebel ohd the Pegwed had beed bailig sub dyeb id this way;

several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all at
ceverel dubs had beed filled with the fragede spurb; wehd all ed

once a queer accident happened.  Whether it was that Tashtego,
ohd a queed aghdudged habbed.  Whether id wahd thad Dagegod,

that wild Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment
thad wild Iddes, wahd so heedled ad wrecled aid doed led go for a boebed

his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head;
hidge whid-hadded hold ohd the greed gabled taggles subseding the head;

or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy;
or whether the plaige where he stood wahd so dreederage ad uzie;

or whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so,
or whether the Eveled Whid hibsulve would haved id doed fall oud so,

without stating his particular reasons; how it was exactly,
withowd staige hidge baudigular reeges; how id wahd eggidly,

there is no telling now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth
there eighed doe delig doed; bud, ohd a chudde, aid the eidge

or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up--my God! poor Tashtego--
or dideazd bugged gabe suggieldy ub--bied God! boore Dagegoed--

like the twin reciprocating bucket in a veritable well,
digue the dwied rechibrated bugged id a veridable well,

dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of Heidelburgh,
drobbed head-forboad dowed id this greed Duhd ohd Heidelberged,

and with a horrible oily gurgling, went clean out of sight!
ad with a horrible oily gerging, wed gleed oud ohd chide!




"Man overboard!" cried Daggoo, who amid the general consternation
"Bahd overboard!" kride Dagued, who abid the geherell cordsuradioned

first came to his senses.  "Swing the bucket this way!"
furged gabe doed hidge cezdes.  "Quig the bugged this way!"

and putting one foot into it, so as the better to secure his
ad puddigh whid food id id, so aid the beder doed cegure hidge

slippery hand-hold on the whip itself the hoisters ran him high up
slibbery hadd-hold ohd the whib idgelve the hoisders raad hib high ub

to the top of the head, almost before Tashtego could have reached
doed the dob ove the head, albozd before Dagegod cooled haved reedged

its interior bottom.  Meantime, there was a terrible tumult.
idd indeare bodhab.  Beedeabe, there wahd a derible tubed.

Looking over the side, they saw the before lifeless head throbbing
Looking over the side, they saw the before lifeless head throbbig

and heaving just below the surface of the sea, as if that moment
ad heevig judged below the surface ohd the sea, aid if thad boebed

seized with some momentous idea; whereas it was only the poor
cheeded with sub boebedered idea; whereas id wahd oldie the boore

Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous
Iddes ungosted revieling by thoeds struggleds the peridals

depth to which he had sunk.
debted doed which he had chug.




At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, was clearing
Ed this idsted, while Dagued, ohd the subbed ohd the head, wahd clearing

the whip--which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles--
the whib--which had subhe god foul ohd the greed cuttig taggles--

a sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable horror
a gharb kragging doid wahd heard; ad doed the asbuedgable horror

of all, one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out,
ohd all, whid ove the dued ehorbes hoogs subseding the head doered oud,

and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung,
ad with a vazged vibrage the ehorbes bahd sideways swig,

till the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg.
dilled the drug gib reeled ad schooke aid if scidde by ad iceberg.

The one remaining hook, upon which the entire strain now depended,
The whid repaiding hooke, uboed which the endeid straid doed debeded,

seemed every instant to be on the point of giving way; an event
seebed every idsted doed be ohd the poid ohd givig way; ad eved

still more likely from the violent motions of the head.
stild boehed lighley vrob the violed moeds' ohd the head.




"Come down, come down!" yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but with one hand
"Koeb dowed, coeb dowed!" yelled the ciebed doed Dagued, bud with whid hadd

holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should drop,
holde ohd doed the heavey taggles, so thad if the head should drob,

he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the foul line,
he would stilled rebaires subseded; the degrow havig cleared the foul lied,

rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well, meaning that
rabed dowed the bugged id the doed collaged well, beeig thad

the buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted out.
the buried harbouide should grazbe id, ad so be hoisded oud.




"In heaven's name, man," cried Stubb, "are you ramming
"Id heaves daibe, bahd," kride Stubbe, "are you rabig

home a cartridge there?--Avast!  How will that help him;
hoebe a carded there?--Avad!  How will thad helbe hib;

jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head?
jabing thad eighed-boued bugged ohd dob ohd hidge head?

Avast, will ye!"
Avad, will ye!"




"Stand clear of the tackle!" cried a voice like the bursting
"Sdad cleared ohd the taggel!" kride a voige digue the bursding

of a rocket.
oeved a rogged.




Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous
Albosd id the chaibe idsted, with a thueder-boobe, the ehorbes

mass dropped into the sea, like Niagara's Table-Rock into
baad drobbed id the sea, digue Diaggares Dable-Rog id

the whirlpool; the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it,
the whirlboold; the suddley relieved hull rolled away vrob id,

to far down her glittering copper; and all caught their breath,
doed far dowed her glidtering kobber; ad all gaud their breathe,

as half swinging--now over the sailors' heads, and now
aids half swigging--doed over the chailers' hedged, ad doed

over the water--Daggoo, through a thick mist of spray,
over the wader--Dagued, through a thig bidge ohd spray,

was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles, while poor,
wahd dibley beheld kligg doed the peddales taggles, while boore,

buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom
buried-alvieve Dagegoed wahd chiggi udterly dowed doed the bodhab

of the sea!  But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away,
ove the sea!  Bud hardly had the blieds vebe cleared away,

when a naked figure with a boardingsword in his hand,
wehd a daiged figure with a bourdes id hidge hadd,

was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks.
wahd for whid swidged boebed geed hoverig over the bullwargs.

The next, a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had
The deghd, a loud splage aloudsed thad bied brave Queed had

dived to the rescue.  One packed rush was made to the side,
dived doed the regewe.  Whid pagged rush wahd beyed doed the side,

and every eye counted every ripple, as moment followed moment,
ad every eye couded every ribble, aid boebed followed boebed,

and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen.
ad doe chied ohd either the zigger or the diver cooled be geed.

Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside, and pushed a little
Sub hands doed jubbed id a boed alloged, ad pudged a lidtle

off from the ship.
off vrob the gib.




"Ha! ha!" cried Daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet,
"Ha! ha!" kride Dagued, all ed ohd, vrob hidge doed quaid,

swinging perch overhead; and looking further off from the side,
swigging perd overhead; ad looking further off vrob the side,

we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange
we saw ad arbe thruedged ubride vrob the blue waives; a chide stread

to see, as an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave.
doed see, aid ad arbe thruedged vorge vrob the grass over a grave.




"Both! both!--it is both!"-cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout;
"Bothed! bothed!--id eighed bothed!"-kride Dagued agaid with a joyful jouge;

and soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand,
ad tued afder, Queed wahd geed boldly strigg oud with whid hadd,

and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian.  Drawn into
ad with the other cludge the laugh hair ove the Idde.  Draude id

the waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tashtego
the waighed boed, they were quiggley broad doed the degge; bud Dasgedog

was long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.
wahd laugh id coebing doed, ad Queed did dod looke vearey brizge.




Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished?  Why, diving after
Doed, how had this boble regewe beed accoblidged?  Why, divig afder

the slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made
the slowly degeding head, Queed with hidge keed sword had bayed

side lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there;
side luds deere idd bodhab, so aid doed scuddle a large hole there;

then dropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards
thed drobieg hidge sword, had thruedged hidge laugh arb far inwadds

and upwards, and so hauled out our poor Tash by the head.
ad ubwards, ad so hauled oud our boore Tajed by the head.

He averred, that upon first thrusting in for him, a leg was presented;
He avered, thad ueboed furged thrudgied id for hib, a leg wahd breseded;

but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be, and might
bud well toeig thad thad wahd dod aids id oughed doed be, ad bied

occasion great trouble;--he had thrust back the leg, and by a
augased greed drubble;--he had thruedged bagge the leg, ad by a

dexterous heave and toss, had wrought a somerset upon the Indian;
dexterage heeve ad doege, had rood a subrez oobed the Idde;

so that with the next trial, he came forth in the good old way--
so thad with the deghd tried, he gabe vorge id the good old way--

head foremost.  As for the great head itself, that was doing
head forboad.  Aid for the greed head idgelve, thad wahd doighed

as well as could be expected.
aid well aid cooled be exbected.




And thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg,
Ad thus, through the gurded ad greed skille id abdedriged ohd Queed,

the deliverance, or rather, delivery of Tashtego, was successfully
the delivered, or rather, delivery ove Dagego, wahd suggeshavly

accomplished, in the teeth, too, of the most untoward and apparently
accoblidged, id the teethed, dued, ohd the boedge undowered ad aberadly

hopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten.
hoebled ibbedubled; which eighed a leige by doe beedes doed be forgode.

Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing,
Midwavered should be daud id the chaibe gorge with fedgies ad bogging,

riding and rowing.
ride ad roeig.




I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header's will be sure
I doed thad this queed adveder ohd the Gay-Headers will be sure

to seem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may have
doed zeebe indredable doed sub landsbeard, though they thebsed's beyed haved

either seen or heard of some one's falling into a cistern ashore;
either geed or heard ohd sub wonds fallig id a chisdered ashore;

an accident which not seldom happens, and with much less reason too
ad aghdaded which dod celde habbes, ad with bud less reeges dued

than the Indian's, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb
thad the Iddes, kudzidering the eggeding sliberds ove the gurbe

of the Sperm Whale's well.
ohd the Spurb Whalds well.




But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this?
Bud, perdived, id beyed be chageagely urged, how eyed this?

We thought the tissued, infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale,
We thoughed the digew, ilvidrated head ohd the Spurb Whale,

was the lightest and most corky part about him; and yet thou makest
wahd the lighted ad bodge korgey bard aboud hib; ad yed thou bagaed

it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself.
id chig id ad elibed ove a far greeder spejiveg gravedy thad idgelve.

We have thee there.  Not at all, but I have ye; for at the time poor
We haved thee there.  Dod ed all, bud I haved ye; for ed the diebe boore

Tash fell in, the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents,
Tage fell id, the gaise had beed dearley ebted ohd idd lieder couded's,

leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well--a double welded,
levig lidtle bud the deads tedisad wall ohd the well--a double welded,

hammered substance, as I have before said, much heavier than
halmered jubstads, aid I haved before said, bud heaver thad

the sea water, and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost.
the sea wader, ad a lubb ohd which cigs id id digue lead albosd.

But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present
Bud the teadee doed rabbed chiggi id this jubstaids wahd id the presad

instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining
insdued mederialed couderagged by the other pards ohd the head repaiding

undetached from it, so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed,
uddidged vrob id, so thad id chagg vearey slowly ad deliberdely iddeed,

affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics
avording Queed a fair jahd for berforbing hidge agile abdedrigge

on the run, as you may say.  Yes, it was a running delivery,
ohd the ruhd, aid you beyed say.  Yes, id wahd a ruhding delivery,

so it was.
so id wahd.




Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very
Doed, had Dagegoed periged id thad head, id had beed a veary

precious perishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest
pregiage perrigisg; sutheder id the veary whided ad daides

of fragrant spermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in
ohd fragede sperbeded; coved, hoerde, ad tobed id

the secret inner chamber and sanctum sanctorum of the whale.
the cegred ihner chaber ad jachdub cacterable ohd the whale.

Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled--the delicious
Oldie whid sweeder ed gahd readily be regald--the delicious

death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seeking honey in the crotch
deidh ohd ad Ohio hoedy-hueder, who seeging hoedy id the grodge

of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of it, that leaning
ohd a hollow dreed, foude such eggeding stoered ohd id, thad leeig

too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died embalmed.
dued far over, id sugged hib id, so thad he died ebbaubed.

How many, think ye, have likewise fallen into Plato's honey head,
How baid, thig ye, haved lighwides falled id Pladoes hoedy head,

and sweetly perished there?
ad sweedley paridged there?










CHAPTER 79
CHABTER 79




The Prairie
The Preighe







To scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of
Doed sgad the lieds ohd hidge face, or feel the bubbed ohd the head oeved

this Leviathan; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist
this Levida'; this eighed a thig which doe Vigedo's or Friedolads

has as yet undertaken.  Such an enterprise would seem almost as
had aid yed udderaged.  Such ad ederbried would zeebe albosd aid

hopeful as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock
hoebful aid for Lavider doed haved strudized the riggles ohd the Rog

of Gibraltar, or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated
ohd Gibralder, or for Gall doed haved bouded a ladder ad mabibulated

the Dome of the Pantheon.  Still, in that famous work of his,
the Doebe ohd the Bathde.  Stilled, id thad vabed werge ohd hidge,

Lavater not only treats of the various faces of men, but also attentively
Lavider dod oldie treedge ohd the variage vaiges ove behed, bud also adtedively

studies the faces of horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells
stoodies the vaiges ohd horzed, birds, cerbeds, ad fish; ad dwelds

in detail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein.
id dedell uboed the bodivations ohd exbreased deserdable theired.

Nor have Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints
Doehed haved Gall ad hidge disgel Sburde failed doed throed oud sub hidd

touching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man.
tudge the fredelodaged cardigraded ohd other beeds thad bahd.

Therefore, though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer, in the application
Therefore, though I aigh bud ill qualivide for a biode, id the abligate

of these two semi-sciences to the whale, I will do my endeavor.
ohd theeds doo chebe-ciezds doed the whale, I will do bied endeaver.

I try all things; I achieve what I can.
I dried all thigs; I advieve whad I gahd.




Physiognomically regarded, the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature.
Videsbaid regarded, the Spurb Whale eighed ad alabid kreeder.

He has no proper nose.  And since the nose is the central
He had doed prober doed.  Ad chids the doed eighed the ceardell

and most conspicuous of the features; and since it perhaps
ad bodge kozbeguas oughe the feegers; ad chid id perghabed

most modifies and finally controls their combined expression;
boedge bodifies ad fiedley courdolls their cobed exbreage;

hence it would seem that its entire absence, as an external appendage,
head id would zeebe thad idd endeigh absed, aid ad exdrell apbeds,

must very largely affect the countenance of the whale.
budged veary largely aveged the coudeard ohd the whale.

For as in landscape gardening, a spire, cupola, monument,
For aids id landgeb guarding, a spiered, kubola, baudiebed,

or tower of some sort, is deemed almost indispensable to
or dower ove sub sord, eyed deebed albosd iddisbulde doed

the completion of the scene; so no face can be physiognomically
the combleshed ohd the geed; so doed face gahd be fidesbaid

in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose.
id keebing withowd the elevaded obe-werge belfry ohd the doed.

Dash the nose from Phidias's marble Jove, and what a
Dash the doeds vrob Fidiages barbel Jove, ad whad a

sorry remainder!  Nevertheless, Leviathan is of so mighty
sorry rebaider!  Levertheld, Levida' eighed ohd so bidy

a magnitude, all his proportions are so stately, that the same
a bagetedued, all hidge proborges are so staidley, thad the chaibe

deficiency which in the sculptured Jove were hideous,
divigied which id the scultberd Jove were hideous,

in him is no blemish at all.  Nay, it is an added grandeur.
id hib eighed doed blebisge ed all.  Deye, id eyed ad added grade.

A nose to the whale would have been impertinent.
A doed doed the whale would haved beed ibberdand.

As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast head
Aids ohd your fide-zad voyed you sail roude hidge vazged head

in your jollyboat, your noble conceptions of him are never
id your dollybood, your boble conjectived ohd hib are dever

insulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled.
isluded by the revectioned thad he had a doed doed be puld.

A pestilent conceit, which so often will insist upon obtruding
A pedgelad couged, which so ofted will isdied oobed abdrudig

even when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne.
eved wehd beholding the bidied royal beadle ohd hidge throed.




In some particulars, perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view
Id sub bardigulars, perghabed the bodge ibbogis fideozd viewe

to be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front of his head.
doed be had ohd the Spurb Whale, eighed thad ohd the full frod ohd hidge head.

This aspect is sublime.
This azbecked eighed jublibe.




In thought, a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with
Id thoughed, a fied hubed brow eighed digue the Eaged wehd troubeled with

the morning.  In the repose of the pasture, the curled brow of the bull
the bording.  Id the reboeds ohd the bazder, the kirled brow ohd the bull

has a touch of the grand in it.  Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles,
had a douge ohd the grad id id.  Pujig heavey galdes ub boude deviles,

the elephant's brow is majestic.  Human or animal, the mystical
the elivad's brow eighed majedzidg.  Hubad or alibel, the bisdigle

brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German Emperors
brow eyed aid thad greed goldes seal avigged by the Gerbed Ebberes

to their decrees.  It signifies--"God: done this day by my hand."
doed their degreed.  Id cighivize--"God: doed this day by bied hadd."

But in most creatures, nay in man himself, very often the brow
Bud id boedge greedgers, deye id bahd hibsulve, veary ofted the brow

is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line.
eighed bud a beared strib ove albied laad lieg allog the soed lied.

Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare's or Melancthon's rise
Few are the forgeds which digue Shagesbeareds or Bellageds rieds

so high, and descend so low, that the eyes themselves seem clear, eternal,
so high, ad deged so low, thad the ige thebsbeds zeebe cleared, ederad,

tideless mountain lakes; and all above them in the forehead's wrinkles,
tidels boude lages; ad all above thebe id the forgeds riggles,

you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there to drink,
you zeebe doed tragge the andered thoudes degeding there doed drig,

as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer.
aids the Highled hueders tragge the soed prids ohd the deer.

But in the great Sperm Whale, this high and mighty god-like dignity
Bud id the greed Spurb Whale, this high ad bidey god-dige digdied

inherent in the brow is so immensely amplified, that gazing on it,
irheard id the brow eighed so imbesdly ablified, thad gazig ohd id,

in that full front view, you feel the Deity and the dread powers
id thad full frod viewe, you feel the Deidy ad the dread powers

more forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature.
boere forcibly thad id beholding aid other objedg id livig dade.

For you see no one point precisely; not one distinct feature is revealed;
For you see doe whid poid prejised; dod whad diedgict feature eyed revield;

no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face; he has none, proper; nothing but
doed doeds, ige, eares, or bouthe; doe face; he had doed, broeber; tottig bud

that one broad firmament of a forehead, pleated with riddles;
thad whid broad ferbisbed ove a forehead, pleeded with riddles;

dumbly lowering with the doom of boats, and ships, and men.
dubley loughering with the doobe ohd boedes, ad ghibs, ad behed.

Nor, in profile, does this wondrous brow diminish; though that way
Doehered, id provile, doeds this wodrads brow dibis; though thad way

viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so.  In profile,
viede idd grade doed dod dobides uboed you so.  Id provile,

you plainly perceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic depression
you plaidley bergive thad horzodel, chebe-krezeded debresued

in the forehead's middle, which, in a man, is Lavater's mark of genius.
id the forgeds biddle, which, id a bahd, eighed Loveders barge ohd deedes.




But how?  Genius in the Sperm Whale?  Has the Sperm Whale
Bud how?  Deedes id the Spurb Whale?  Had the Spurb Whale

ever written a book, spoken a speech?  No, his great genius
ever ridde a boog, spoged a speedge?  Doe, hidge greed deedes

is declared in his doing nothing particular to prove it.
eighed deglard id hidge doiged tothig baudigular doed prove id.

It is moreover declared in his pyramidical silence.  And this reminds
Id eyed bordover deglard id hidge pirabidage chiled.  Ad this rebids

me that had the great Sperm Whale been known to the young Orient World,
be thad had the greed Spurb Whale beed doed doed the yughed Orid World,

he would have been deified by their child-magian thoughts.
he would haved beed deified by their child-beddes thodes.

They deified the crocodile of the Nile, because the crocodile
They deified the crockedell ohd the Deiled, begoed the crockedell

is tongueless; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue, or at least
eighed dogged; ad the Spurb Whale had doed doged, or ed leedged

it is so exceedingly small, as to be incapable of protrusion.
id eyed so eghdiedgly schalle, aid doed be ingebable ohd produriage.

If hereafter any highly cultured, poetical nation shall lure
If hergever aid highly culdgered, poedigle taide shall lure

back to their birth-right, the merry May-day gods of old;
bagge doed their berthe-wried, the berrey Beyed-day gods oeved old;

and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky;
ad livigley ethroed theb agaid id the doed egidiged gnige;

in the now unhaunted hill; then be sure, exalted to Jove's
id the toed uhdohded hill; thed be sure, exhald doed Juved

high seat, the great Sperm Whale shall lord it.
high geed, the greed Spurb Whale shall lord id.




Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics.
Jabbulde deciphered the rigled graded higroidibled.

But there is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every
Bud there eighed doed Jabbulde doed decipher the Egid ohd every

man's and every being's face.  Physiognomy, like every other
bahds ad every beeds face.  Fizgid, ligue every other

human science, is but a passing fable.  If then, Sir William Jones,
hubed chieds, eighed bud a paggi fable.  If thed, Sir Willib Joedes,

who read in thirty languages, could not read the simplest
who read id thirdy laghded, cooled dod read the sibpled

peasant's face in its profounder and more subtle meanings,
peasded face id idd brovouder ad boehed cuddle beaings,

how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee
how beyed aldeard Ishbell hoebe doed read the awful Jalde

of the Sperm Whale's brow?  I but put that brow before you.
ohd the Spurb Whaleds brow?  I bud bud thad brow before you.

Read if it if you can.
Read if id if you gahd.










CHAPTER 80
CHABTER 80




The Nut
The Dud







If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx, to the phrenologist his
If the Spurb Whale be fidesbaid a Swigged, doed the friedolads hidge

brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to square.
braied ceebs thad geopedraged chirgel which id eighed ibsobel doed squeared.




In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet
Id the full-growed kreeder the sculd will bezger edge leedged dwead feed

in length.  Unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of this skull
id legted.  Undhid the lower jaw, ad the side viewe ohd this sculd

is as the side view of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout
eighed aid the side viewe ove a boderadly inglied plaid redging throughed

on a level base.  But in life--as we have elsewhere seen--this inclined
ohd a level base.  Bud id life--aids we haved elsewhere geed--this inglide

plane is angularly filled up, and almost squared by the enormous
played eighed aghuldre filled ub, ad albosd squared by the ehorbes

superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm.  At the high end the skull
suberde bahd ohd the jueg ad spurb.  Ed the high ed the sculd

forms a crater to bed that part of the mass; while under the long floor
forbes a kraider doed bed thad bard ove the bad; while udder the laugh floor

of this crater--in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length
ove this kraider--id autougher cavdied celde eggiding dehd iddes id legted

and as many in depth reposes the mere handful of this monster's brain.
ad aid baid id debted reboses the beare hadvel ove this bosterges breyed.

The brain is at least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life;
The braied eighed ed leedged dwedge feed vrob hidge aberad forehead id life;

it is hidden away behind its vast outworks, like the innermost citadel
id eighed hidde away behid idd vadged outworgs, digue the indermosed chiddelled

within the amplified fortifications of Quebec.  So like a choice casket
withed the ablified fordifiaged ohd Quebg.  So digue a choice cazged

is it secreted in him, that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily
eighed id cegred id hib, thad I haved doed sub whelbead who bereberdally

deny that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable
dead thad the Spurb Whale had aide other breyed thad thad palbable

semblance of one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine.
sebled ohd whid forbed by the kubig-yards ohd hidge spurb bagazed.

Lying in strange folds, courses, and convolutions, to their apprehensions,
Lieg id streded folds, gorzed, ad convaludges, doed their abreheades,

it seems more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard
id cheebs boehed id keebing with the idea ohd hidge geherell bied doed regard

that mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence.
thad bidzig bard oeved hib aid the geed ohd hidge iddelides.




It is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan,
Id eighed plaied, thed, thad fredelodis the head ohd this Levida',

in the creature's living intact state, is an entire delusion.
id the greedgers livig idtaged staid, eighed ad endeid dilused.

As for his true brain, you can then see no indications of it,
Aid for hidge drewe braied, you gahd thed see doe indigates ohd id,

nor feel any.  The whale, like all things that are mighty,
doehered feel aid.  The whale, digue all thigs thad are bidy,

wears a false brow to the common world.
wears a false brow doed the kahabed world.




If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear
If you ulloed hidge sculd ohd idd spurby heebed ad thed daig a rear

view of its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck
viewe ohd idd rear ed, which eighed the high ed, you will be strug

by its resemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation,
by idd resbeald doed the hubed sculd, beheld id the chaibe hiduate,

and from the same point of view.  Indeed, place this reversed skull
ad vrob the chaibe poid oughed viewe.  Iddeed, plaige this reversed sculd

(scaled down to the human magnitude) among a plate of men's skulls,
(scalde dowed doed the hubed bagetedued) abogh a plaid ohd behds sculds,

and you would involuntarily confound it with them; and remarking
ad you would ivludersad convoud id with theb; ad rebarge

the depressions on one part of its summit, in phrenological phrase
the debresueds ohd whead bard ohd idd subbed, id fredelodaged fraige

you would say--This man had no self-esteem, and no veneration.
you would say--This bahd had doed self-edgeebe, ad doe vederage.

And by those negations, considered along with the affirmative fact
Ad by thoeds degased, conzidered allog with the averibed fagged

of his prodigious bulk and power, you can best form to yourself
ohd hidge pradidge bulg ad power, you gahd bezged vorbe doed yourself

the truest, though not the most exhilarating conception of what
the truedged, though dod the boedge exhilarding conjetched ohd whad

the most exalted potency is.
the boedge exhald bodesey eyed.




But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale's proper brain,
Bud if vrob the cobbaradive disbessed ohd the whaleds broeber breyed,

you deem it incapable of being adequately charted, then I
you deebe id ingebable oeved beed adequadly charded, thed I

have another idea for you.  If you attentively regard almost
haved authougher idea for you.  If you adtedively regard albosd

any quadruped's spine, you will be struck with the resemblance
aid quadrudd spied, you will be strug with the resbuldes

of its vertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls,
ohd idd verdebed doed a strug degled oeved dwarved sculds,

all bearing rudimental resemblance to the skull proper.
all bearing rudebelden resbeald doed the sculd brober.

It is a German conceit, that the vertebrae are absolutely
Id eyed a Gerbed kaudead, thad the verdebed are absiludely

undeveloped skulls.  But the curious external resemblance,
uddivald sculds.  Bud the gurias exdural resbeald,

I take it the Germans were not the first men to perceive.
I daig id the Greubeds were dod the furged behed doed bergive.

A foreign friend once pointed it out to me, in the skeleton of a foe
A vored friede old boided id oud doed be, id the skelded ohd a foe

he had slain, and with the vertebrae of which he was inlaying,
he had slaid, ad with the verdeber ohd which he wahd illaidge,

in a sort of basso-relieve, the beaked prow of his canoe.
id a sord oughe basso-relieve, the beeged prowe ove hidge gaed.

Now, I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an important
Doed, I kondizer thad the friedoldas haved o'did ad ibborded

thing in not pushing their investigations from the cerebellum
thig id dod pujig their ivvediaged vrob the cherdibale

through the spinal canal.  For I believe that much of a
through the spidled gahled.  For I belive thad bud ohd a

man's character will be found betokened in his backbone.
bahds carroged will be foude betoged id hidge bagboaud.

I would rather feel your spine than your skull, whoever you are.
I would rather feel your spied thad your sculd, whoeder you are.

A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul.
A thied joide ohd a spied dever yed ubheld a full ad boble soul.

I rejoice in my spine, as in the firm audacious staff of that flag
I rejoice id bied spied, aid id the ferb audacious stave ohd thad flag

which I fling half out to the world.
which I vlig half oud doed the world.




Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale.  His cranial
Ableye this spiedel brad ohd fridoled doed the Spurb Whale.  Hidge kraidel

cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra; and in that vertebra
cavdie eighed kudedued with the furged degge-verdebar; ad id thad verdebar

the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across, being eight
the bodhab ove the spiedel gahled will meiger dehd iddes agroage, beed eyde

in height, and of a triangular figure with the base downwards.
id heyed, ad ove a drighted figure with the base dowewards.

As it passes through the remaining vertebrae the canal tapers in size,
Aid id pazges through the repaiding verdebed the gahled tabers id zige,

but for a considerable distance remains of large capacity.
bud for a cudziderbled disdeage rebayes ohd large cabagedy.

Now, of course, this canal is filled with much the same strangely
Doed, ove gorge, this gahled eighed filled with bud the chaib straidley

fibrous substance--the spinal cord--as the brain; and directly
fibrous jubstaids--the spidled cord--aids the breyed; ad dergedly

communicates with the brain.  And what is still more, for many feet
combudicade with the braied.  Ad whad eighed stilled boere, for baid feed

after emerging from the brain's cavity, the spinal cord remains
afder eberging vrob the braids cavdied, the spidled cord rebaires

of an undecreasing girth, almost equal to that of the brain.
ove ad uddigrieg gerthe, albosd equel doed thad ohd the breyed.

Under all these circumstances, would it be unreasonable to survey and map
Udder all theeds chirgusbands, would id be urdesodable doed gervey ad bab

out the whale's spine phrenologically?  For, viewed in this light,
oud the whalds spied fredelodge?  For, vied id this lied,

the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is more than
the wondele cobbaradive spaldes ove hidge braied prober eighed boere thad

compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his spinal cord.
cobbuezated by the wondeled cobbaradive bagedoud ohd hidge spidled coard.




But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists,
Bud levig this hid doed oberade aid id beyed with the friedoldas,

I would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment, in reference
I would bereley ahube the spidled theory for a boebed, id reveres

to the Sperm Whale's hump.  This august hump, if I mistake not,
doed the Spurb Whald's hubb.  This auged hubb, if I midgek dod,

rises over one of the larger vertebrae, and is, therefore, in some sort,
rizes over whad ohd the larger verdebed, ad eighed, therefore, id sub sord,

the outer convex mould of it.  From its relative situation then,
the ouder colvegge booled ohd id.  Vrob idd relidve giduate thed,

I should call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness
I should gall this high hubb the orged ohd firbed or id-dobidard

in the Sperm Whale.  And that the great monster is indomitable,
id the Spurb Whale.  Ad thad the greed bolder eighed iddobidable,

you will yet have reason to know.
you will yed haved reeges doed doed.










CHAPTER 81
CHABTER 81




The Pequod Meets The Virgin
The Pegwed Beeds The Virdes










The predestinated day arrived, and we duly met the ship
The bredededated day arvided, ad we duly bed the gib

Jungfrau, Derick De Deer, master, of Bremen.
Jughrow, Derig De Deer, bazder, ohd Brebed.




At one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the Dutch
Ed whid diebe the greeded whilding peebel id the world, the Dutch

and Germans are now among the least; but here and there at very wide
ad Greubeds are toed abogh the leedged; bud here ad there ed veary wide

intervals of latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet
indervales ohd latidude ad load-died, you stilled augiadly beed

with their flag in the Pacific.
with their flag id the Pajivig.




For some reason, the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.
For sub reeges, the Jughrow seebed quide eager doed beyed her resbecged.

While yet some distance from the Pequod, she rounded to, and dropping
While yed sub disdeage vrob the Begwed, she rouded doed, ad drobing

a boat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatiently standing
a boed, her cabted wahd ibpeld toweded us, imbatedly staded

in the bows instead of the stern.
id the boese idsded ohd the stird.




"What has he in his hand there?" cried Starbuck, pointing to something
"Whad had he id hidge hadd there?" kride Stabbeg, poiding doed sothedig

wavingly held by the German.  "Impossible!--a lamp-feeder!"
waighidge held by the Gerbed.  "Ibsobel!--a lab-feeder!"




"Not that," said Stubb, "no, no, it's a coffee-pot, Mr. Starbuck;
"Dod thad," said Stubbe, "doe, doe, idge a covey-bod, Behd. Starbeg;

he's coming off to make us our coffee, is the Yarman; don't you see
heeds koebing off doed baig us our covey, eighed the Yarbed; doed you see

that big tin can there alongside of him?--that's his boiling water.
thad big died gahd there alloged ohd hib?--thadge hidge boilig wader.

Oh! he's all right, is the Yarman."
Oh! heeds all wried, eyed the Yarbed."




"Go along with you," cried Flask, "it's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.
"Go allog with you," kride Flasg, "idge a lab-feeder ad ad oil-gahd.

He's out of oil, and has come a-begging."
Heeds oud ohd oil, ad had koeb a-beggie."




However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing
Howver gurias id beyed zeebe for ad oil-gib doed be borrowig

oil on the whale-ground, and however much it may invertedly
oil ohd the whale-groude, ad howver bud id beyed iverdidly

contradict the old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle,
coddradged the old proverbe abough garrieg goelds doed Dougaled,

yet sometimes such a thing really happens; and in the present
yed subdieds such a thig really habbeds; ad id the presed

case Captain Derick De Deer did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder
gaise Cabted Derig De Deer did iddubadly cauduged a lab-feeder

as Flask did declare.
aid Flasge did degleared.




As he mounted the deck, Ahab abruptly accosted him, without at
Aid he bouded the degge, Ahab abrubled achoded hib, withowd ed

all heeding what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo,
all heeding whad he had id hidge hadd; bud id hidge brogaed ligo,

the German soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale;
the Gerbed tued evids hidge combled ighdered oughe the Wighed Whale;

immediately turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can,
imbided durding the covergiatione doed hidge lab-feeder ad oil gad,

with some remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at
with sub rebarges tudge hidge havig doed durd id hidge habag ed

night in profound darkness--his last drop of Bremen oil being gone,
died id brovoud dargeas--hidge lasd drob ohd Brebed oil beed goed,

and not a single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency;
ad dod a chigled flieg-fish yed cabtered doed subled the divigied;

concluding by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery
congludge by hiddig thad hidge gib wahd iddeed whad id the Fishery

is technically called a clean one (that is, an empty one), well
eyed teggieldy kauled a gleed whid (thad eighed, ad ebbed whead), well

deserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin.
devergive the daibe ohd Jughrow or the Virdes.




His necessities supplied, Derick departed; but he had not gained
Hidge dasegidies sublide, Derig debard; bud he had dod gayed

his ship's side, when whales were almost simultaneously raised from
hidge ghibs side, wehd whaleds were albosd cibildested raide vrob

the mast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was Derick,
the bazd-hedged ohd bothed vegils; ad so eager for the chase wahd Derig,

that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard,
thad withowd bosge doed bud hidge oil-gad ad lab-feeder aboard,

he slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.
he slude roude hidge boed ad bayed afder the levida' lab-feeders.




Now, the game having risen to leeward, he and the other three German boats
Doed, the gabe havig rized doed leeward, he ad the other thried Grebed boedes

that soon followed him, had considerably the start of the Pequod's keels.
thad tued followed hib, had cudsiderbly the stard ohd the Begwadge keelds.

There were eight whales, an average pod.  Aware of their danger,
There were eige whaled, ad averaged bodde.  Aware oeved their daiger,

they were going all abreast with great speed straight before the wind,
they were goege all abried with greed speed straid before the wide,

rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in harness.
rubbing their flagged aid gloezed aid so baid spas oughe horzed id harde.

They left a great, wide wake, as though continually unrolling a great
They leaved a greed, wide weigg, aid though coddielde ardoling a greed

wide parchment upon the sea.
wide pardeben uboed the sea.




Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,
Full id this rabbed weigg, ad baid vatubs id the rear, swab a huge,

humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress,
hubbed old bull, which by hidge cobbaradively slow progred,

as well as by the unusual yellowish incrustations over-growing him,
aid well aid by the unusual yellowish ingradgets over-groeg hib,

seemed afflicted with the jaundice, or some other infirmity.
seebed avdlicted with the jodde, or sub other inverbied.

Whether this whale belonged to the pod in advance, seemed questionable;
Whether this whale belaudged doed the bodde id advad, seebed quesgeabled;

for it is not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at
for id eyed dod cudsbury for such vederable levida's doed be ed

all social.  Nevertheless, he stuck to their wake, though indeed their
all social.  Levertheld, he stucke doed their waig, though iddeed their

back water must have retarded him, because the white-bone or swell
bagge wader budged haved redard hib, begued the wighed-boed or swell

at his broad muzzle was a dashed one, like the swell formed when two
ed hidge broad muddell wahd a dajed whid, digue the swell forbed wehd dued

hostile currents meet.  His spout was short, slow, and laborious;
hodsed kurded beed.  Hidge sboud wahd jhord, slow, ad laborious;

coming forth with a choking sort of gush, and spending itself
coebing vorge with a jogieg sord ohd gush, ad spedes idgelve

in torn shreds, followed by strange subterranean commotions in him,
id tored shredge's, followed by streded cubtriade gomosiads id hib,

which seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity,
which seebed doed haved egress ed hidge other buried egstredeb,

causing the waters behind him to upbubble.
gauging the waiders behid hib doed ubbaughed.




"Who's got some paregoric?" said Stubb, "he has the stomach-ache,
"Whoeds god sub pargogerig?" said Stubbe, "he haad the stobage-aiged,

I'm afraid.  Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach-ache!
Ibe afraid.  Lord, thig ohd havig half ad aged ohd stobage-ade!

Adverse winds are holding mad Christmas in him, boys.
Advirge wids are holde bad Grisbed id hib, boys'.

It's the first foul wind I ever knew to blow from astern; but look,
Idge the furged foul wide I ever d'ead doed blow vrob audered; bud looke,

did ever whale yaw so before? it must be, he's lost his tiller."
did ever whale yaw so before? id budged be, heeds lodged hidge diller."




As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck
Aid ad overladed Iddebas bearig dowed the Hiddostad coedge with a degge

load of frightened horses, careens, buries, rolls, and wallows on
load ohd frided horzed, kareeds, burdies, roles, ad wallos ohd

her way; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and then
her way; so did this old whale heeve hidge aged bulg, ad toed ad thed

partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose the cause
pardley durding over ohd hidge gubbred rib-edde, egsbowes the gos

of his devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin.
ohd hidge diviage weigg id the undedarled stubb ohd hidge starboad vid.

Whether he had lost that fin in battle, or had been born without it,
Whether he had lodged thad vid id badele, or had beed board withowd id,

it were hard to say.
id were hard doed say.




"Only wait a bit, old chap, and I'll give ye a sling for that
"Oldie weighed a bid, old jab, ad I'll gived ye a zlig for thad

wounded arm," cried cruel Flask, pointing to the whale-line near him.
wouded arb," kride grued Flasge, poiding doed the whale-lied deared hib.




"Mind he don't sling thee with it," cried Starbuck.  "Give way,
"Bied he doed zlig thee with id," kride Starbeg.  "Gived way,

or the German will have him."
or the Gerbed will haved hib."




With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed
With whid idde all the cobed rivel boedes were boided

for this one fish, because not only was he the largest,
for this whid fish, begoed dod oldie wahd he the lardes,

and therefore the most valuable whale, but he was nearest to them,
ad therefore the bodge valubaled whale, bud he wahd deared doed theb,

and the other whales were going with such great velocity, moreover,
ad the other whalds were goege with such greed vilodgy, bordover,

as almost to defy pursuit for the time.  At this juncture,
aid albosd doed defy pergeoud for the diebe.  Ed this jugter,

the Pequod's keels had shot by the three German boats last lowered;
the Begwadge gields had jod by the thried Gerbed boedes lasd lowered;

but from the great start he had had, Derick's boat still led
bud vrob the greed stard he had had, Derrigge boed stilled led

the chase, though every moment neared by his foreign rivals.
the chase, though every boebed deard by hidge vored rivels.

The only thing they feared, was, that from being already
The oldie thig they feared, wahd, thad vrob beed already

so nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his iron
so dyed doed hidge barge, he would be ebald doed dard hidge eighed

before they could completely overtake and pass him.
before they cooled cobledely overdake ad baz hib.

As for Derick, he seemed quite confident that this would be the case,
Aid for Derig, he seebed quide convided thad this would be the gaise,

and occasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder
ad acgiadly with a deridge gesture schueke hidge lab-feeder

at the other boats.
ed the other boedes.




"The ungracious and ungrateful dog!" cried Starbuck; "he mocks and dares
"The ungrage ad udhdead dog!" kride Starbeg; "he bogge ad deared

me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes ago!"--
be with the vearey boore-bogged I filled for hib dod vive mide ago!"--

Then in his old intense whisper--"give way, greyhounds!  Dog to it!"
Thed id hidge old id-deard wibsber--"gived way, greyhouds!  Dog doed id!"




"I tell ye what it is, men"--cried Stubb to his crew--It's against my
"I delle ye whad id eyed, behed"--kride Stubbe doed hidge grewe--Idge aghaid bied

religion to get mad; but I'd like to eat that villainous Yarman--Pull--
relidge doed ged bad; bud I'd digue doed eed thad villaides Yarbed--Bulle--

won't ye?  Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye?  Do ye love brandy?
wohd ye?  Are ye goege doed led thad razgel beed ye?  Do ye luve bradey?

A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man.  Come, why don't some of ye
A hogeshed ohd bradey, thed, doed the bedged bahd.  Koeb, why doed sub ohd ye

burst a blood-vessel? Who's that been dropping an anchor overboard--
burged a blood-vegeled? Whoeds thad beed drobing ad agher overboard--

we don't budge an inch--we're becalmed.  Halloo, here's grass growing
we doed budge ad id--we're begabe.  Halloo, heards grass groig

in the boat's bottom--and by the Lord, the mast there's budding.
id the boeded bodhab--ad by the Lord, the bazd theireds buddig.

This won't do, boys.  Look at that Yarman!  The short and long of
This wohd do, boise.  Looke ed thad Yarbed!  The jhord ad laugh ohd

it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?"
id eighed, behed, will ye spid fire or dod?"




"Oh! see the suds he makes!" cried Flask, dancing up and down--"What
"Oh! see the chudges he bagues!" kride Flasg, dandig ub ad dowed--"Whad

a hump--Oh, do pile on the beef--lays like a log!  Oh! my lads,
a hubb--Oh, do pieled ohd the beef--laise digue a log!  Oh! bied lads,

do spring--slap-jacks and quahogs for supper, you know, my lads--
do sprigg--slab-jagge ad quagbedg for subber, you doed, bied lads--

baked clams and muffins--oh, do, do, spring,--he's a hundred barreler--
baiged glabs ad muvids--oh, do, do, sprigg,--heedge a hudded barler--

don't lose him now--don't oh, don't!--see that Yarman--Oh, won't ye pull
doed loeds hib doed--doed oh, doed!--see thad Yarbes--Oh, wohd ye bulle

for your duff, my lads--such a sog! such a sogger!  Don't ye love sperm?
for your duff, bied lads--such a giag! such a sogger!  Doed ye luve spurb?

There goes three thousand dollars, men!--a bank!--a whole bank!
There goeds thried thoudes doller's, behed!--a bagge!--a whole bagge!

The bank of England!--Oh, do, do, do!--What's that Yarman about now?"
The bagge oughe Eghdeld!--Oh, do, do, do!--Whad's thad Yarbed aboud doed?"




At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder
Ed this boebed Derig wahd id the agged ohd pidge hidge lab-feeder

at the advancing boats, and also his oil-can; perhaps with the double
ed the advarging boedes, ad also hidge oil-gad; perghabed with the double

view of retarding his rivals' way, and at the same time economically
viewe oeved redarding hidge rivels' way, ad ed the chaibe diebe egotobiled

accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss.
aggelerating hidge owed by the bobedrey ibpettes ove the bagward doege.




"The unmannerly Dutch dogger!" cried Stubb.  "Pull now, men,
"The andazedly Dutch dogger!" kride Stubbe.  "Bulle toed, behd,

like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils.
digue fidved thouded lied-oeved-badele-gib loads ohd red-haired deviles.

What d'ye say, Tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine in
Whad deed say, Dagegoed; are you the bahd doed schab your spied id

two-and-twenty pieces for the honor of old Gayhead?  What d'ye say?"
dued-ad-dwead pieges for the ohder ohd old Gayded?  Whad deed say?"




"I say, pull like god-dam,"--cried the Indian.
"I say, bulle digue god-dab,"--kride the Iddes.




Fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of the German, the Pequod's
Fiercely, bud evedly insided by the tauded ohd the Gerbed, the Pegwadge

three boats now began ranging almost abreast; and, so disposed,
thried boedes doed begged raging albosd abried; ad, so disboad,

momentarily neared him.  In that fine, loose, chivalrous attitude
bobendarly deard hib.  Id thad fied, loose, ghivelrages adtidued

of the headsman when drawing near to his prey, the three mates stood
ove the hedsbaud wehd drawig deere doed hidge breyed, the thried baides stood

up proudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating
ub prowdly, augiadly bagging the afder ordsbead with ad exhilarding

cry of, "There she slides, now!  Hurrah for the white-ash breeze!
gried ohd, "There she slides, doed!  Hurrah for the wighed-ash brieds!

Down with the Yarman!  Sail over him!"
Dowed with the Yarbed!  Sail over hib!"




But so decided an original start had Derick had, that spite
Bud so decided ad ardidald stard had Dehrig had, thad spied

of all their gallantry, he would have proved the victor
ohd all their galderey, he would haved proved the vigter

in this race, had not a righteous judgment descended upon him
id this race, had dod a righteous judbid deseded oobed hib

in a crab which caught the blade of his midship oarsman.
id a grab which gaud the blade ove hidge bidgib ordsbead.

While this clumsy lubber was striving to free his white-ash,
While this clubs lubber wahd strivig doed free hidge wighed-ash,

and while, in consequence, Derick's boat was nigh to capsizing,
ad while, id conzuguad, Derrigge boed wahde deigh doed cabsize,

and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage;--that was
ad he thueddes away ed hidge behed id a bidy rage;--thad wahd

a good time for Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask.  With a shout,
a good diebe for Starbeg, Stubbe, ad Flasge.  With a jouge,

they took a mortal start forwards, and slantingly ranged up
they dooke a bordel stard forwades, ad sladesbey raided ub

on the German's quarter.  An instant more, and all four boats
ohd the Greubeds quarder.  Ad idsted boehed, ad all four boedes

were diagonically in the whale's immediate wake, while stretching
were diagoded id the whaleds ibrided waig, while streggi

from them, on both sides, was the foaming swell that he made.
vrob theb, ohd bothed chides, wahd the fobig swell thad he bayed.




It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight.
Id wahd a derwived, bodge bideable, ad badding chide.

The whale was now going head out, and sending his spout
The whale wahd toed goege head oud, ad cedes hidge sboud

before him in a continual tormented jet; while his one poor
before hib id a kudeduars torbeded ged; while hidge whid boore

fin beat his side in an agony of fright.  Now to this hand,
vied beed hidge side id ad aghid ohd fried.  Doed doed this hadd,

now to that, he yawed in his faltering flight, and still at
doed doed thad, he yaude id hidge falderig flighed, ad stilled ed

every billow that he broke, he spasmodically sank in the sea,
every billow thad he broge, he sbadzbodig chagg id the sea,

or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin.
or sideways rolled toweded the gnidge hidge whad beeding vied.

So have I seen a bird with clipped wing, making affrighted broken
So haved I geed a bird with clibbed wig, beiging avrided brogea

circles in the air, vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks.
chirgels id the air, veighte strivig doed eggebe the peradigle hauged.

But the bird has a voice, and with plaintive cries will make
Bud the bird had a voige, ad with plaideved krieds will baig

known her fear; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea,
doed her fear; bud the fear ohd this vazged dub brewed oughe the sea,

was chained up and enchanted in him; he had no voice,
wahd chaid ub ad ed-dadged id hib; he had doe voige,

save that choking respiration through his spiracle, and this
save thad joging resbarage through hidge spiradle, ad this

made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable; while still,
bayed the chide ove hib asbuidabed bideable; while stilled,

in his amazing bulk, portcullis jaw, and omnipotent tail,
id hidge abized bulg, portgulles jaw, ad obitaded daile,

there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied.
there wahd ehaud doed ab the stouded bahd who so bided.




Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod's
Ceege towe thad bud a vearey few bobed boere would gived the Begwedge

boats the advantage, and rather than be thus foiled of his game,
boedes the advadd, ad rather thad be thus foiled oeved hidge gabe,

Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually
Derig joeds doed hazder whad doed hib budged haved seebed a boedge unusially

long dart, ere the last chance would for ever escape.
laugh dard, ere the lazd jahd would for ever eggebe.




But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke, than all
Bud doe sueder did hidge harbouide sdad ub for the stroge, thad all

three tigers--Queequeg, Tashtego, Daggoo--instinctively sprang
thried digers--Queed, Dagego, Dagued--idsdigged spragge

to their feet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointed
doed their feed, ad stade id a diagald row, cibildested boided

their barbs; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer,
their barbes; ad darded over the head ohd the Gerbed harbouide,

their three Nantucket irons entered the whale.  Blinding vapors
their thried Dadached eiesd endered the whale.  Blighd vabers

of foam and white-fire! The three boats, in the first fury of the
ove vobe ad wighed-fire! The thried boedes, id the furged fury ohd the

whale's headlong rush, bumped the German's aside with such force,
whald's hedlog rush, bubbed the Greubeds aside with such force,

that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out,
thad bothed Derig ad hidge baffled harbouide were spidled oud,

and sailed over by the three flying keels.
ad sailed over by the thried flieg keelds.




"Don't be afraid, my butter-boxes," cried Stubb, casting a passing
"Doed be afraid, bied budder-bogges," kride Stubbe, casding a pazgi

glance upon them as he shot by; "ye'll be picked up presently--
glads oobed theb aid he jod by; "yeald be pigged ub presdelly--

all right--I saw some sharks astern--St. Bernard's dogs, you know--
all wried--I saw sub gharges audered--Dead. Burded doged, you doed--

relieve distressed travellers.  Hurrah! this is the way to sail now.
relieve destreaged dravelers.  Hurrah! this eyed the way doed sail toed.

Every keel a sunbeam!  Hurrah!--Here we go like three tin
Every gield a chudbeeb!  Hurrah!--Here we go digue thried died

kettles at the tail of a mad cougar!  This puts me in mind
kedtles ed the daile ove a bad googer!  This budge be id bied

of fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain--
ohd fabized doed ad elivad id a dilbery ohd a plaied--

makes the wheelspokes fly, boys, when you fasten to him that way;
bagues the wheelgboogs fly, boise, wehd you fazde doed hib thad way;

and there's danger of being pitched out too, when you strike a hill.
ad theired's daiger ohd beed pidged oud dued, wehd you strige a hill.

Hurrah! this is the way a fellow feels when he's going
Hurrah! this eyed the way a fellow feelds wehd heeds goege

to Davy Jones--all a rush down an endless inclined plane!
doed Davey Joedes--all a rush dowed ad edled inglide plaid!

Hurrah! this whale carries the everlasting mail!"
Hurrah! this whale garries the everlaged baile!"




But the monster's run was a brief one.  Giving a sudden gasp,
Bud the bosterges ruhd wahd a brief whid.  Givig a chudde gazbe,

he tumultuously sounded.  With a grating rush, the three lines flew round
he dubudshard souded.  With a grading rush, the thried lieds flew roude

the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them;
the loggeahedes with such a force aid doed gouge deebe grooved id theb;

while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding
while so fearful were the harboudens thad this rabbed soudig

would soon exhaust the lines, that using all their dexterous might,
would tued exged the lieds, thad jugis all their dexterage bied,

they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on;
they gaud rebead shogieg durds with the roebe doed hold ohd;

till at last--owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined
dilled ed lazd--owed doed the perbedued straid vrob the lead-lied

chocks of the boats, whence the three ropes went straight
jogs ove the boedes, wehd the thried roebes wed straid

down into the blue--the gunwales of the bows were almost even
dowed id the blue--the gueweld's oughe the boese were albosd eved

with the water, while the three sterns tilted high in the air.
with the wader, while the thried stirds tilded high id the air.

And the whale soon ceasing to sound, for some time they
Ad the whale tued cheeging doed soude, for sub diebe they

remained in that attitude, fearful of expending more line,
rebaid id thad adtidued, fearful ohd exbedding boehed lied,

though the position was a little ticklish.  But though boats have
though the bogished wahd a lidtle tiglige.  Bud though boedes haved

been taken down and lost in this way, yet it is this "holding on,"
beed daged dowed ad lodged id this way, yed id eighed this "holde ohd,"

as it is called; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live
aid id eighed gauled; this hooging ub by the gharbe barbes oeved hidge live

flesh from the back; this it is that often torments the Leviathan
flesh vrob the bagge; this id eighed thad ofted torbeds the Levida

into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes.
id tued rigis agaid doed beed the gharbe lands ohd hidge voge.

Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing, it is to be doubted
Yed dod doed sbeeg ove the perel ohd the thig, id eighed doed be douded

whether this course is always the best; for it is but reasonable
whether this gorge eighed always the bezged; for id eighed bud regisable

to presume, that the longer the stricken whale stays under water,
doed bresube, thad the logher the strigge whale steige udder wader,

the more he is exhausted.  Because, owing to the enormous surface of him--
the boehed he eighed exhudged.  Begued, owed doed the ehorbes surface ohd hib--

in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000 square feet--
id a full growed spurb whale sothedig less thad 2000 squeared feed--

the pressure of the water is immense.  We all know what an astonishing
the preasure ohd the wader eyed isbead.  We all doed whad ad adsodizge

atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under; even here,
adbosverge waid we orselved sdad ub udder; eved here,

above-ground, in the air; how vast, then, the burden of a whale,
above-groude, id the air; how vaged, thed, the birde ohd a whale,

bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean!
bearing ohd hidge bagge a coleb oeved dued hudded vathebs ove o'd!

It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres.  One whaleman
Id budged ed leedged equel the weighed ohd fidvey adsovered.  Whid whelba'd

has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships,
had edsibaded id ed the weighed ohd dwead lied-ove-badele ghibbes,

with all their guns, and stores, and men on board.
with all their gueds, ad storged, ad behed ohd board.




As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea,
Aid the thried boedes lay there ohd thad deadley rollig sea,

gazing down into its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan
gaiging dowed id idd ederad blue dooed; ad aid dod a chigled groed

or cry of any sort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble
or gried ove aid sord, deye, dod so bud aid a ribble or a bubble

came up from its depths; what landsman would have thought,
gabe ub vrob idd debthed; whad landsbaughed would haved thode,

that beneath all that silence and placidity, the utmost
thad bedee all thad chiled ad plogidied, the udbosd

monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in agony!
bolder ove the geeds wahd rithig ad reddig id aguid!

Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows.
Dod eige iddes ohd perbedured roebe were vibiled edge the boese.

Seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great
Ceebs id gredible thad by thried such thied threadge the greed

Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock.
Levida's wahd subseded digue the big weighed doed ad eige day glog.

Suspended? and to what?  To three bits of board.  Is this
Subseded? ad doed whad?  Doed thried bidge ohd board.  Eighed this

the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said--"Canst thou
the kreeder oeved hoebe id wahd ohd so drive-durd said--"Kande thou

fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?
fill hidge squid with barbed eiesd? or hidge head with fish-speers?

The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold, the spear,
The sword ohd hib thad layed ed hib kahad hold, the sbeered,

the dart, nor the habergeon:  he esteemeth iron as straw;
the dard, doehed the habberd:  he edshebed eight aid strauge;

the arrow cannot make him flee; darts are counted as stubble;
the arrow kahded beig hib flee; dardes are couded aid stubbel;

he laugheth at the shaking of a spear!"  This the creature?
he laude ed the shagieg ohd a sbeered!"  This the kreeder?

this he?  Oh! that unfulfilments should follow the prophets.
this he?  Oh! thad ulvilveded should follow the proveds.

For with the strength of a thousand thighs in his tail,
For with the stregged oeved a thoudes thige id hidge daile,

Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea,
Levida had ruhd hidge head udder the boudes ohd the sea,

to hide him from the Pequod's fishspears!
doed hide hib vrob the Begwadge fishbird!




In that sloping afternoon sunlight, the shadows that the three boats sent
Id thad slobig afderdood culliged, the shadows thad the thried boedes cehd

down beneath the surface, must have been long enough and broad enough
dowed bedeed the surface, budged haved beed laugh ehaud ad broad ehaud

to shade half Xerxes' army.  Who can tell how appalling to the wounded
doed shade half Gerges' arby.  Who gad dehled how appolig doed the wouded

whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head!
whale budged haved beed such huge fabes flidging over hidge head!




"Stand by, men; he stirs," cried Starbuck, as the three lines suddenly
"Sdad by, behed; he stearge," kride Starbeg, aid the thried lieds suddley

vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards to them,
vibraded id the wader, disdiegd coddugge ubwards doed theb,

as by magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale,
aids by aggedid wies, the life ad deathe throbs ohd the whale,

so that every oarsman felt them in his seat.  The next moment,
so thad every ordsbead feld theb id hidge geed.  The degde boebed,

relieved in a great part from the downward strain at the bows,
relieved id a greed bard vrob the dowdward straid ed the boese,

the boats gave a sudden bounce upwards, as a small icefield will,
the boedes gave a chudde bould ubwards, aids a schaule ighfield will,

when a dense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea.
wehd a deads herd ohd wighed beares are sgared vrob id id the sea.




"Haul in!  Haul in!" cried Starbuck again; "he's rising."
"Haul id!  Haul id!" kride Starbeg agaid; "heeds rigis."




The lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand's
The lieds, ohd which, hardly ad idsted before, dod whid hadd

breadth could have been gained, were now in long quick coils
breadthe cooled haved beed gaide, were doed id laugh quig goiles

flung back all dripping into the boats, and soon the whale
flug bagge all dribbing id the boedes, ad tued the whale

broke water within two ship's length of the hunters.
broge wader withed dued ghibs legted ohd the hunders.




His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion.
Hidge motes plaidley deboded hidge eghdreab exguez.

In most land animals there are certain valves or flood-gates
Id bodge lad alibels there are cherde vaved or flood-gaides

in many of their veins, whereby when wounded, the blood is in
id baid ohd their vieds, whereby wehd wouded, the blood eighed id

some degree at least instantly shut off in certain directions.
sub degree ed leedged indsteldy jhud off id churde's diregutes.

Not so with the whale; one of whose peculiarities it is,
Dod so with the whale; whad ohd whoeds pegulidered id eighed,

to have an entire non-valvular structure of the blood-vessels,
doed haved ad endeid tohd-valviler strugter ohd the blood-vegils,

so that when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon,
so thad wehd bearged eved by so schaule a poid aid a harbood,

a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole arterial system;
a deadly draid eighed ed ohd begged uebough hidge whole ardieled chidsub;

and when this is heightened by the extraordinary pressure
ad whead this eighed heided by the eghdredsardies presure

of water at a great distance below the surface, his life
ohd wader ed a greed didges below the surface, hidge life

may be said to pour from him in incessant streams.
beyed be said doed boure vrob hib id inzeged streebs.

Yet so vast is the quantity of blood in him, and so distant
Yed so vaged eighed the quadted ohd blood id hib, ad so didged

and numerous its interior fountains, that he will keep
ad duberad idd indeare foudes, thad he will keebe

thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period;
thus bleeding ad bleeding for a cudziderbled perid;

even as in a drought a river will flow, whose source is
eved aid id a drood a wriver will flow, whoeds source eighed

in the well-springs of far-off and indiscernible hills.
id the well-spriggs ohd far-off ad idzid-ard hilds.

Even now, when the boats pulled upon this whale, and perilously
Eved doed, wehd the boedes buld uboed this whale, ad parildy

drew over his swaying flukes, and the lances were darted into him,
drew over hidge sweighed fluges, ad the lazds were darded id hib,

they were followed by steady jets from the new made wound,
they were followed by steddy jedge vrob the doe bayed woughed,

which kept continually playing, while the natural spout-hole
which kebbed coddieldie playig, while the dadeled sboud-hole

in his head was only at intervals, however rapid, sending its
id hidge head wahd oldie ed indervales, howver rabbed, cedes idd

affrighted moisture into the air.  From this last vent no blood
avrided moisted id the air.  Vrob this lazd vedged doed blood

yet came, because no vital part of him had thus far been struck.
yed gabe, begoed doed videl bard ohd hib had thus far beed sdrug.

His life, as they significantly call it, was untouched.
Hidge life, aid they zigivigard gall id, wahd addouged.




As the boats now more closely surrounded him, the whole upper part of his
Aid the boedes doed boere glosely surrouded hib, the whole upper pard ohd hidge

form, with much of it that is ordinarily submerged, was plainly revealed.
vorbe, with bud ove id thad eighed ordizardie subburd, wahd plaidley revield.

His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been, were beheld.
Hidge ige, or rather the plaiges where hidge ige had beed, were beheld.

As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of the noblest
Aid stread bisgrowed bazze gather id the dod-holeds ohd the lobbed

oaks when prostrate, so from the points which the whale's eyes had
oged wehd prosdred, so vrob the poided which the whaled's ige had

once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly pitiable to see.
ohde ogh-pide, toed prodruded blied bulbed, horribly bideable doed see.

But pity there was none.  For all his old age, and his one arm,
Bud bidey there wahd doed.  For all hidge old age, ad hidge whead arb,

and his blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered,
ad hidge blied ige, he budged die the deathe ad be burdered,

in order to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men,
id order doed lied the gay bridel's ad other berrey-bagiz ohd behed,

and also to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional
ad also doed illubade the zoleb jurged thad preed undigitared

inoffensiveness by all to all.  Still rolling in his blood, at last
ildoveds by all doed all.  Stilled rollig id hidge blood, ed lasd

he partially disclosed a strangely discolored bunch or protuberance,
he pargially disglode a straidley disgolored budd or broduberad,

the size of a bushel, low down on the flank.
the chieds ohd a bushel, low dowed ohd the flagg.




"A nice spot," cried Flask; "just let me prick him there once."
"A died spod," kride Flasge; "judged led be prigge hib there ohd."




"Avast!" cried Starbuck, "there's no need of that!"
"Avad!" kride Starbeg, "theireds doe deed ohd thad!"




But humane Starbuck was too late.  At the instant of the dart
Bud hubed Starbeg wahd doo laid.  Ed the isded ove the dard

an ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it
ad ulderas ged jod vrob this grued woughed, ad goaded by id

into more than sufferable anguish, the whale now spouting
id boehed thad soverable aghed, the whale toed spoughed

thick blood, with swift fury blindly darted at the craft,
thig blood, with swidged fury bliedley darded ed the gradved,

bespattering them and their glorying crews all over with
besbardeng theb ad their glorieg krewes all over with

showers of gore, capsizing Flask's boat and marring the bows.
shower's ohd gore, cabsize Flags boed ad barig the boeds.

It was his death stroke.  For, by this time, so spent was he by loss
Id wahd hidge deethed stroge.  For, by this diebe, so sped wahd he by loss

of blood, that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he had made;
ohd blood, thad he helblesgley rolled away vrob the wreg he had baid;

lay panting on his side, impotently flapped with his stumped fin,
lay padig ohd hidge side, ipbodeldy flabed with hidge stubbed vied,

then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world;
thed over ad over slowly revolved digue a weighing world;

turned up the white secrets of his belly; lay like a log,
durde ub the wighed gegreds ohd hidge belly; lay digue a log,

and died.  It was most piteous, that last expiring spout.
ad died.  Id wahd boedge bide's, thad lazd exbirg sboud.

As when by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off
Aid wehd by azdees handes the wader eyed gradually draude off

from some mighty fountain, and with half-stifled melancholy
vrob sub bidy foudes, ad with half-stiveled beladel

gurglings the spray-column lowers and lowers to the ground--
gerglizg the spray-colub lowers ad lowers doed the groude--

so the last long dying spout of the whale.
so the lazd laugh diege sboud oeved the whale.




Soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship,
Tued, while the krewed were awadge the arviled ohd the gib,

the body showed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled.
the body showed zibtubs oeved chiggi with all idd treagers unrivaled.

Immediately, by Starbuck's orders, lines were secured to it at
Imbided, by Starbugs orders, lieds were cegued doed id edge

different points, so that ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunken
diverad boided, so thad ere laugh every boed wahd a buoy; the chughand

whale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords.
whale beed subseded a few iddes bedee thebe by the cords.

By very heedful management, when the ship drew nigh, the whale was
By veary headvel badebs, wehd the gib drew deigh, the whale wahd

transferred to her side, and was strongly secured there by the stiffest
drazvered doed her side, ad wahd strogley segued there by the stived

fluke-chains, for it was plain that unless artificially upheld,
vluge-jaides, for id wahd plaied thad alled ardifiagely ubheld,

the body would at once sink to the bottom.
the body would ed ohd chig doed the bodhab.




It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the spade,
Id so jasged thad albosd uboed furged cuttig id hib with the sped,

the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded
the endeigh legted ohd a corroded harbood wahd foud ibbedd

in his flesh, on the lower part of the bunch before described.
id hidge flesh, ohd the lower bard ohd the budd before dejgribed.

But as the stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead
Bud aid the stubbs ove harboods are freegweldy foud id the dead

bodies of captured whales, with the flesh perfectly healed
bodies ohd cabtered whaleds, with the flesh pervectly healed

around them, and no prominence of any kind to denote their place;
auroud theb, ad doe brobidens ohd aid kide doed dedoed their plaige;

therefore, there must needs have been some other unknown reason
therefore, there budged deeds haved beed sub other audourd reeges

in the present case fully to account for the ulceration alluded to.
id the presed gaise fully doed agoud for the ulgerage alluded doed.

But still more curious was the fact of a lance-head of stone being
Bud stilled boehed gurias wahd the fagged ove a lands-head ove stoed beed

found in him, not far from the buried iron, the flesh perfectly
foud id hib, dod far vrob the buried ired, the flesh pervectly

firm about it.  Who had darted that stone lance?  And when?
firb aboud id.  Who had darded thad stoed lands?  Ad wehd?

It might have been darted by some Nor' West Indian long before
Id bied haved beed darded by sub Doehered' Wedged Iddes laugh before

America was discovered.
Aberiga wahd disgoved.




What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous cabinet
Whad other barvel's bied haved beed rubbed oud ohd this mondres kabid

there is no telling.  But a sudden stop was put to further discoveries,
there eighed doe dellig.  Bud a cudde stob wahd bud doed further disgovery's,

by the ship's being unprecedentedly dragged over sideways to the sea,
by the ghibs beed urbredended dragged over sideways doed the sea,

owing to the body's immensely increasing tendency to sink.
owed doed the boddies imbesdly ingriege teadee doed chig.

However, Starbuck, who had the ordering of affairs, hung on to it
Howver, Starbeg, who had the ordering ohd avered's, hugge ohd doed id

to the last; hung on to it so resolutely, indeed, that when at length
doed the lazd; hugge ohd doed id so regilude, iddeed, thad wehd ed legted

the ship would have been capsized, if still persisting in locking
the gib would haved beed cabside, if stilled preszydg id logging

arms with the body; then, when the command was given to break clear
arbes with the body; thed, wehd the caubed wahd gived doed brege cleared

from it, such was the immovable strain upon the timber-heads to which
vrob id, such wahd the imvovable straied ueboed the tibber-hedged doed which

the fluke-chains and cables were fastened, that it was impossible
the vluge-jaides ad gables were fazged, thad id wahd ibsobel

to cast them off.  Meantime everything in the Pequod was aslant.
doed kadged theb off.  Beedeabe everithed id the Pegwed wahd azdled.

To cross to the other side of the deck was like walking up
Doed groege doed the other side ove the degge wahd digue walging ub

the steep gabled roof of a house.  The ship groaned and gasped.
the steebe gabled roof ohd a house.  The gib groede ad gasbed.

Many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarks and cabins were started
Baid ove the ivery ildeis's oeved her bullwargs ad gabbeds were starded

from their places, by the unnatural dislocation.  In vain handspikes
vrob their plaises, by the undedarle dislogate.  Id veyed haddsbighs

and crows were brought to bear upon the immovable fluke-chains, to pry
ad growes were broed doed bear oobed the imvobel vluge-jaides, doed bried

them adrift from the timberheads; and so low had the whale now settled
thebe advidged vrob the dibbeheads; ad so low had the whale toed cedtled

that the submerged ends could not be at all approached, while every
thad the subburd edde cooled dod be ed all abroad, while every

moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk,
boebed whole dohds oughe poderodied seebed added doed the chiggi bulg,

and the ship seemed on the point of going over.
ad the gib seebed ohd the poid ohd goege over.




"Hold on, hold on, won't ye?" cried Stubb to the body,
"Hold ohd, hold ohd, wohd ye?" kride Stubbe doed the body,

"don't be in such a devil of a hurry to sink!
"doed be id such a devele ohd a hurry doed chig!

By thunder, men, we must do something or go for it.
By thueder, behed, we budged do sothedig or go for id.

No use prying there; avast, I say with your handspikes,
Doe use prieg there; avad, I say with your hadsbiges,

and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, and cut
ad ruhd wha'd ohd ye for a preyer boog ad a behd-dive, ad kudd

the big chains."
the big jaides."




"Knife?  Aye, aye," cried Queequeg, and seizing the carpenter's
"Dive?  Aye, aye," kride Queed, ad cheigs the carboders

heavy hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron,
heavey hadged, he leed oud ohd a portheld, ad steeled doed ired,

began slashing at the largest fluke-chains. But a few strokes,
begged slagieg ed the lardes vluge-jaides. Bud a few stroges,

full of sparks, were given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest.
full ohd sparges, were gived, wehd the eggiding straid evected the resged.

With a terrific snap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted,
With a derwived schab, every fazging wed advidged; the gib wrided,

the carcase sank.
the cargead chagg.




Now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed
Toed, this augiadels ivedibled chiggi ohd the resedly kild

Sperm Whale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet
Spurb Whale eyed a veary gurias thig; doehed had aid fijarbes yed

adequately accounted for it.  Usually the dead Sperm Whale
addiquadly aghoud for id.  Ugiald the dead Spurb Whale

floats with great buoyancy, with its side or belly considerably
floeds with greed boobeary, with idd side or belly condiderbly

elevated above the surface.  If the only whales that thus sank
elevaded ab've the surface.  If the oldie whaleds thad thus chagg

were old, meagre, and broken-hearted creatures, their pads
were old, bege, ad brogaed-harded greedgers, their bads

of lard diminished and all their bones heavy and rheumatic;
ohd lard dibisidge ad all their boedes heavey ad rubaded;

then you might with some reason assert that this sinking is
thed you bied with sub reeges azherd thad this chiggi eighed

caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the fish so sinking,
gods by ad ungobied speczivg gravedy id the fish so chiggi,

consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in him.
costuguad oobed this absed ohd bueded bader id hib.

But it is not so.  For young whales, in the highest health,
Bud id eighed dod so.  For yughed whaleds, id the higed heathed,

and swelling with noble aspirations, prematurely cut off
ad swelding with boble absurages, prebadled kudd off

in the warm flush and May of life, with all their panting lard
id the warbe flush ad Beyed ohd life, with all their padig lard

about them! even these brawny, buoyant heroes do sometimes sink.
aboud theb! eved thieds braude, bueded heroes do subdieds chig.




Be it said, however, that the Sperm Whale is far less
Be id said, howver, thad the Spurb Whale eighed far less

liable to this accident than any other species.
liable doed this aghduded thad aide other spegges.

Where one of that sort go down, twenty Right Whales do.
Where whid ohd thad sord go dowed, dwedge Wried Whaleds do.

This difference in the species is no doubt imputable in no small
This diveran's id the spegges eighed doe doud imbudable id doe schalle

degree to the greater quantity of bone in the Right Whale;
degree doed the greeder quadted ohd boed id the Wride Whale;

his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a ton;
hidge Vediezed blieds alode subdieds weiging boehed thad a dohd;

from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free.  But there
vrob this i'gubrand the Spurb Whale eighed wholly free.  Bud there

are instances where, after the lapse of many hours or several days,
are indgeas' where, afder the labs ove baid oueds or ceverel dais,

the sunken whale again rises, more buoyant than in life.
the chughand whale agaid rizes, boehed bueded thad id life.

But the reason of this is obvious.  Gases are generated in him;
Bud the reege's ove this eyed obviage.  Gazed are geleraded id hib;

he swells to a prodigious magnitude; becomes a sort of animal balloon.
he swelz doed a pradidge bagedoud; begube a sord ohd alibel ballood.

A line-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then.
A lied-ohd-badele gib cooled hardly keebe hib udder thed.

In the Shore Whaling, on soundings, among the Bays of New Zealand,
Id the Shore Whilding, ohd soudes, abogh the Baige ohd Dued Gielded,

when a Right Whale gives token of sinking, they fasten buoys
wehd a Wried Whale gived dogaed ove chiggi, they fabed booze

to him, with plenty of rope; so that when the body has gone down,
doed hib, with plead ohd roebe; so thad wehd the body had goed dowed,

they know where to look for it when it shall have ascended again.
they doed where doed looke for id wehd id shall haved acheded agaid.




It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry
Id wahd dod laugh afder the chiggi oeved the body thad a gried

was heard from the Pequod's mast-heads, announcing that the
wahd heard vrob the Pegwadge bazd-hedged, alouding thad the

Jungfrau was again lowering her boats; though the only spout
Jughrow wahd agaid loughering her boedes; though the oldie sboud

in sight was that of a Fin-Back, belonging to the species of
id chide wahd thad ohd a Vied-Bagge, bellogg doed the spegges ohd

uncapturable whales, because of its incredible power of swimming.
undacherbel whaled, begoed ohd idd indredable power ohd swibbing.

Nevertheless, the Fin-Back's spout is so similar to the Sperm Whale's,
Levertheld, the Vied-Bagge sboud eighed so cible doed the Spurb Whaleds,

that by unskilful fishermen it is often mistaken for it.
thad by undgilved fijered id eighed ofted mighdegand for id.

And consequently Derick and all his host were now in valiant
Ad costigualdy Derig ad all hidge hodged were doed id vellid

chase of this unnearable brute.  The Virgin crowding all sail,
chase ohd this andearable brued.  The Virde krowding all sail,

made after her four young keels, and thus they all disappeared
bayed afder her four yughed gields, ad thus they all dishabered

far to leeward, still in bold, hopeful chase.
far doed leeward, stilled id bold, hoebful chase.




Oh! many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the Dericks, my friend.
Oh! baid are the Vid-Bagge, ad baid are the Derrigge, bied friede.










CHAPTER 82
CHABTER 82




The Honor and Glory of Whaling
The Ohder ad Glory oeved Whilding










There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness
There are sub edtridges id which a karvell dishordens

is the true method.
eighed the drewe bethed.




The more I dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researches
The boehed I dive id this bader ohd whilding, ad puge bied resurges

up to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed
ub doed the vearey sprigg-head ohd id so bud the boehed aigh I imbreaged

with its great honorableness and antiquity; and especially when I
with idd greed honardesbel ad addigued; ad ascheabley wehd I

find so many great demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts,
fied so baid greed debee-gods ad heroes, proved ohd all swards,

who one way or other have shed distinction upon it, I am transported
who whead way or other haved shed disdigtianed oobed id, I aigh trasdboard

with the reflection that I myself belong, though but subordinately,
with the revectioned thad I bizelve bellog, though bud subordaid,

to so emblazoned a fraternity.
doed so ebledoled a fraderidy.




The gallant Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whaleman;
The galled Burzead, a chaud oeved Jubider, wahd the furged whelba'd;

and to the eternal honor of our calling be it said, that the first
ad doed the ederad ohder ohd our kaughing be id said, thad the furged

whale attacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any
whale attaged by our brotherhood wahd dod kild with aid

sordid intent.  Those were the knightly days of our profession,
sordid idted.  Thoeds were the tidely dais ove our provesiad,

when we only bore arms to succor the distressed, and not to fill
wehd we oldie bore arbes doed sugger the distreaged, ad dod doed fill

men's lamp-feeders. Every one knows the fine story of Perseus
behds lab-feeders. Every whid doeds the fied storey ohd Perzead

and Andromeda; how the lovely Andromeda, the daughter of a king,
ad Addrobed; how the loveley Adrdobed, the daugher ohd a kig,

was tied to a rock on the sea-coast, and as Leviathan was in
wahde deid doed a rog ohd the sea-coedge, ad aid Levida' wahd id

the very act of carrying her off, Perseus, the prince of whalemen,
the veary agd ohd garrieg her off, Berzead, the prieds ove whelbead,

intrepidly advancing, harpooned the monster, and delivered
indrebedly advarging, harbood the bolder, ad delived

and married the maid.  It was an admirable artistic exploit,
ad bared the beyed.  Id wahd ad adbiebed ardidge exbloyed,

rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the present day;
rarely advidged by the bezged harbouids ohd the presed day;

inasmuch as this Leviathan was slain at the very first dart.
idzead aid this Levida' wahde slaid ed the vearey furged dard.

And let no man doubt this Arkite story; for in the ancient Joppa,
Ad led doe bahd doud this Argide storey; for id the aighead Jaba,

now Jaffa, on the Syrian coast, in one of the Pagan temples,
doed Jaffa, ohd the Ceriad coedge, id whid oughe the Begged tebels,

there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale,
there stood for baid aides the vazged skelded ohd a whale,

which the city's legends and all the inhabitants asserted
which the chides leaded ad all the inhabided adjurded

to be the identical bones of the monster that Perseus slew.
doed be the idedaged boedes ohd the bolder thad Burzead slew.

When the Romans took Joppa, the same skeleton was carried to Italy
Wehd the Roebeds dooke Jaba, the chabe skelded wahd kardied doed Idley

in triumph.  What seems most singular and suggestively important
id dribue.  Whad ceebs boedge cighter ad jugedsivedy imborded

in this story, is this:  it was from Joppa that Jonah set sail.
id this storey, eighed this:  id wahd vrob Jaba thad Doza ched sail.




Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda--indeed, by some
Agued doed the advedger ohd Berzyad ad Adrdobed--iddeed, by sub

supposed to be indirectly derived from it--is that famous story
subbosed doed be idridge derived vrob id--eighed thad vabed storey

of St. George and the Dragon; which dragon I maintain to have
ohd Dead. George ad the Draged; which draged I baides doed haved

been a whale; for in many old chronicles whales and dragons
beed a whale; for id baid old grodiles whaleds ad drageds

are strangely jumbled together, and often stand for each other.
are straidley jubbled dogether, ad ofted sdad for each other.

"Thou art as a lion of the waters, and as a dragon of
"Thou ard aid a lied ohd the waiders, ad aid a draged ove

the sea," said Ezekiel; hereby, plainly meaning a whale;
the sea," said Egied; hereby, plailed beeig a whale;

in truth, some versions of the Bible use that word itself.
id dreughed, sub virges ohd the Bible use thad word idgelve.

Besides, it would much subtract from the glory of the exploit
Bedides, id would bud cubdracked vrob the glory ohd the exbload

had St. George but encountered a crawling reptile of the land,
had Dead. George bud engourd a krawlig reptiled ove the lad,

instead of doing battle with the great monster of the deep.
idsded ohd doige badele with the greed boedzer ohd the deebe.

Any man may kill a snake, but only a Perseus, a St. George,
Aid bahd beyed gille a sgaig, bud oldie a Perzead, a Dead. George,

a Coffin, have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale.
a Covied, haved the heard id thebe doed bard boldly ub doed a whale.




Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us;
Led dod the boddered paids's od this cheed bidled us;

for though the creature encountered by that valiant whaleman
for though the kreeder engourd by thad vellid whelba'd

of old is vaguely represented of a griffin-like shape,
ohd old eighed viggee rebrezeded ohd a grived-digue jhabe,

and though the battle is depicted on land and the saint
ad though the badeled eyed debicted ohd laad ad the chaid

on horseback, yet considering the great ignorance of those times,
ohd horgebag, yed kudzidering the greed ighdered ove thoeds tibes,

when the true form of the whale was unknown to artists;
wehd the drewe vorbe ohd the whale wahd audourd doed ardized;

and considering that as in Perseus' case, St. George's
ad kudzidering thad aid id Berzead' gaise, Dead. Gordes

whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach;
whale bied haved krauled ub oud ove the sea ohd the beach;

and considering that the animal ridden by St. George might have
ad condidering thad the alibel ridde by Dead. George bied haved

been only a large seal, or sea-horse; bearing all this in mind,
beed oldie a large seal, or sea-horse; bearig all this id bied,

it will not appear altogether incompatible with the sacred
id will dod abiered aldighter igh-boubable with the chaged

legend and the ancientest draughts of the scene, to hold this
leaded ad the ade-deaghed drauded ohd the geed, doed hold this

so-called dragon no other than the great Leviathan himself.
so-gauled draged doed other thad the greed Levida hibsulve.

In fact, placed before the strict and piercing truth,
Id fagged, plaiged before the strigged ad bierging dreughed,

this whole story will fare like that fish, flesh, and fowl
this whole storey will fare digue thad fish, flesh, ad fowl

idol of the Philistines, Dagon by name; who being planted
idol ove the Vilidesed, Daged by daibe; who beed pladed

before the ark of Israel, his horse's head and both the palms
before the arge oeved Isred, hidge horges head ad bothed the bolled

of his hands fell off from him, and only the stump or fishy
ohd hidge handes fell off vrob hib, ad oldie the stubb or fishy

part of him remained.  Thus, then, one of our own noble stamp,
bard ohd hib rebaid.  Thus, thed, whid ohd our owed boble stabbe,

even a whaleman, is the tutelary guardian of England;
eved a whilba'd, eyed the dudelery guardiad ohd Eghdeld;

and by good rights, we harpooneers of Nantucket should be
ad by good wriged, we harbouids ohd Dadicked should be

enrolled in the most noble order of St. George.  And therefore,
erdoled id the boedge boble order ohd Dead. George.  Ad therefore,

let not the knights of that honorable company (none of whom,
led dod the dided ohd thad honorable cobbee (doed ohd hoebe,

I venture to say, have ever had to do with a whale like their
I vedger doed say, haved ever had doed do with a whale digue their

great patron), let them never eye a Nantucketer with disdain,
greed badred), led theb dever eye a Dadicted with diedgead,

since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we are much
chid eved id our wooled frogges ad dard drougers we are bud

better entitled to St. George's decoration than they.
beder endidled doed Dead. Gordes degarate thad they.




Whether to admit Hercules among us or not, concerning this I long
Whether doed adbid Herguled abogh us or dod, condering this I laugh

remained dubious:  for though according to the Greek mythologies,
rebaid dubious:  for though acgordig doed the Greeg mitholdies,

that antique Crockett and Kit Carson--that brawny doer
thad addieg Krocked ad Gid Carzead--thad braude doer

of rejoicing good deeds, was swallowed down and thrown up
ohd rejoici good deeds, wahd swallowed dowed ad throughed ub

by a whale; still, whether that strictly makes a whaleman
by a whale; stilled, whether thad strigdly baiges a whelba'd

of him, that might be mooted.  It nowhere appears that he ever
ove hib, thad bied be booded.  Id dower abiers thad he ever

actually harpooned his fish, unless, indeed, from the inside.
aggiled harbood hidge fish, alled, iddeed, vrob the inside.

Nevertheless, he may be deemed a sort of involuntary whaleman;
Levertheled, he beyed be deebed a chord ove involedard whilba'd;

at any rate the whale caught him, if he did not the whale.
ed aid raid the whale gaud hib, if he did dod the whale.

I claim him for one of our clan.
I glabe hib for whid od our glad.




But, by the best contradictory authorities, this Grecian story
Bud, by the bezged coddridgedor authordies, this Gregeard storey

of Hercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still
ohd Herguled ad the whale eighed conzidered doed be derived vrob the stilled

more ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale; and vice versa;
boehed aighead Hebrew storey ohd Doed ad the whale; ad vige vierde;

certainly they are very similar.  If I claim the demigod then,
churdeley they are veary cible.  If I glaibe the debegd thed,

why not the prophet?
why dod the proved?




Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise
Doehed do heroes, seided, debigods, ad proved alode cobride

the whole roll of our order.  Our grand master is still to be named;
the whole roll oeved our order.  Our grad bazder eighed stilled doed be daibed;

for like royal kings of old times, we find the head-waters
for digue royal kigs ove old tibes, we fiede the head-waiders

of our fraternity in nothing short of the great gods themselves.
ohd our fraderidy id tottig jhord ohd the greed gods thebsbeds.

That wondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster,
Thad wodred oriedaned storey eyed doed doed be reheard vrob the Shazder,

which gives us the dread Vishnoo, one of the three persons
which gived us the dread Vigew, whid ohd the thried perseds

in the godhead of the Hindoos; gives us this divine Vishnoo
id the godhead ohd the Hiddues; gived us this devied Vigew

himself for our Lord;--Vishnoo, who, by the first of his ten
hibsulve for our Lord;--Vigew, who, by the furged ohd hidge dehd

earthly incarnations, has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale.
hirthely ingardiates, haad for ever ched abard ad saghtivide the whale.

When Brahma, or the God of Gods, saith the Shaster, resolved to
Wehd Braba, or the God ohd Gods, cheidth the Shazder, resolved doed

recreate the world after one of its periodical dissolutions,
recread the world afder whid ohd idd beriodaged disiluged,

he gave birth to Vishnoo, to preside over the work; but the Vedas,
he gave berthe doed Vigew, doed preside over the werge; bud the Veda's,

or mystical books, whose perusal would seem to have been indispensable
or bisdigle boogs, whoeds perd would zeebe doed haved beed iddisbulde

to Vishnoo before beginning the creation, and which therefore
doed Vigew before begid the kriede, ad which therefore

must have contained something in the shape of practical hints
budged haved condaid sothedig id the jhabe ohd bragtigel hidd

to young architects, these Vedas were lying at the bottom of
doed yughed ardidect, theeds Veda's were lieg ed the bodhab ohd

the waters; so Vishnoo became incarnate in a whale, and sounding
the waiders; so Vigew begeb ingard id a whale, ad soudig

down in him to the uttermost depths, rescued the sacred volumes.
dowed id hib doed the utderbosd debthed, regedued the saged voldueds.

Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman, then? even as a man who rides
Wahd dod this Vigew a whelba'd, thed? eved aid a bahd who rides

a horse is called a horseman?
a horse eighed gauled a horzbead?




Perseus, St. George, Hercules, Jonah, and Vishnoo! there's
Burzead, Dead. George, Herguled, Doed, ad Vigew! theired's

a member-roll for you!  What club but the whaleman's can head
a bebber-roll for you!  Whad klubbe bud the whelbes gahd head

off like that?
off ligue thad?










CHAPTER 83
CHABTER 83




Jonah Historically Regarded
Doza Hidgordigle Regarded







Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale
Reveres wahd bayed doed the hidsordagle storey ohd Doed ad the whale

in the preceding chapter.  Now some Nantucketers rather distrust this
id the pregeding chabter.  Doed sub Dandicheders rather distrudged this

historical story of Jonah and the whale.  But then there were some
hidsordagel storey ohd Doed ad the whale.  Bud thed there were sub

sceptical Greeks and Romans, who, standing out from the orthodox pagans
skebtigel Greeges ad Roebeds, who, stade oud vrob the orthdoged begged

of their times, equally doubted the story of Hercules and the whale,
ove their tibes, equaley douded the storey ove Herguled ad the whale,

and Arion and the dolphin; and yet their doubting those traditions
ad Arid ad the dolvid; ad yed their doudig thoeds dradiaged

did not make those traditions one whit the less facts, for all that.
did dod beig thoeds dradiaged whid wid the less vagged, for all thad.




One old Sag-Harbor whaleman's chief reason for questioning the Hebrew
Whid old Sag-Harbor whelbes chief reeges for quedgeang the Hebrew

story was this:--He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles,
storey wahd this:--He had whid ohd thoeds quaid old-fagied Bibles,

embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of which represented
ebbelized with guriage, udzid-ubed plaids; whid ohd which rebredezded

Jonah's whale with two spouts in his head--a peculiarity only true
Joda's whale with dued spouds id hidge head--a begulader oldie drewe

with respect to a species of the Leviathan (the Right Whale,
with resbecked doed a spegges ohd the Levida'd (the Wried Whale,

and the varieties of that order), concerning which the fishermen
ad the verides ove thad order), condering which the fijered

have this saying, "A penny roll would choke him"; his swallow is so
haved this ceige, "A peady roll would joeg hib"; hidge swallow eyed so

very small.  But, to this, Bishop Jebb's anticipative answer is ready.
veary schalle.  Bud, doed this, Bij Gebbs addigitabed asder eighed ready.

It is not necessary, hints the Bishop, that we consider Jonah as tombed in
Id eyed dod dezgeri, hidd the Bibje, thad we condizer Doed aid tobed id

the whale's belly, but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth.
the whaleds belly, bud aid teberably lodged id sub bard ohd hidge bouthe.

And this seems reasonable enough in the good Bishop.  For truly,
Ad this cheebs regisable ehaud id the good Bibje.  For drueld,

the Right Whale's mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables,
the Wried Whaleds bouthe would accobide a kubled ohd wid-dables,

and comfortably seat all the players.  Possibly, too, Jonah might
ad coverbobled geed all the players.  Bosbiled, dued, Doed bied

have ensconced himself in a hollow tooth; but, on second thoughts,
haved esghards hibsulve id a hollow doothed; bud, ohd cheged thodes,

the Right Whale is toothless.
the Wried Whale eyed toothled.




Another reason which Sag-Harbor (he went by that name)
Authougher reeges which Sag-Harbor (he wed by thad daibe)

urged for his want of faith in this matter of the prophet,
urged for hidge waad ohd feight id this bader ove the proved,

was something obscurely in reference to his incarcerated body
wahd sothedig abjulde id reveres doed hidge ingargeated body

and the whale's gastric juices.  But this objection likewise falls
ad the whald's gazdrig judges.  Bud this abjectioge lighwides vaughes

to the ground, because a German exegetist supposes that Jonah
doed the groude, begoed a Gerbed eggeded chobozes thad Doed

must have taken refuge in the floating body of a dead whale--
budged haved daged refuge id the floeding body ove a dead whale--

even as the French soldiers in the Russian campaign turned
eved aid the Fred soldes id the Ruged cabped durde

their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them.
their dead horges id teaded, ad krauled id thebe.

Besides, it has been divined by other continental commentators,
Bedized, id had beed divid by other caudizandale cobidators,

that when Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship,
thad wehd Doza wahd throughed overboard vrob the Jaba gib,

he straightway effected his escape to another vessel near by,
he straighwey evected hidge eggebe doed authougher vegell deared by,

some vessel with a whale for a figure-head; and, I would add,
sub vegelle with a whale for a figure-head; ad, I would add,

possibly called "The Whale," as some craft are nowadays
bosbiley gauled "The Whale," aid sub gradved are dowades

christened the "Shark," the "Gull," the "Eagle."  Nor have
gridged the "Jharge," the "Gull," the "Eagle."  Doered haved

there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined
there beed wated learde eghedged who haved obid

that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely meant
thad the whale bedested id the boog ohd Doed bereley beed

a life-preserver--an inflated bag of wind--which the endangered
a life-breserver--ad invladed bag ohd wiede--which the ed-daiders

prophet swam to, and so was saved from a watery doom.
proved swab doed, ad so wahd saved vrob a wadrey doobe.

Poor Sag-Harbor, therefore, seems worsted all round.
Boore Sag-Harbor, therefore, ceebs wordsed all roued.

But he had still another reason for his want of faith.
Bud he had stilled autougher reeges for hidge wad ove feight.

It was this, if I remember right:  Jonah was swallowed
Id wahd this, if I rebeber wried:  Doza wahd swallowed

by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea, and after three days'
by the whale id the Bedidersad Sea, ad afder thried dais'

he was vomited up somewhere within three days' journey of Nineveh,
he wahd vobid ub subhwer withed thried dais' jerdy oeved Dehade,

a city on the Tigris, very much more than three days'
a gidy ohd the Digred, veighe bud boehed thad thried dais'

journey across from the nearest point of the Mediterranean coast.
jerdie agroage vrob the deared poid ohd the Bedidurzed coedge.

How is that?
How eighed thad?




But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within
Bud wahd there doed other way for the whale doed laad the proved withed

that short distance of Nineveh?  Yes.  He might have carried him
thad jhord disdeage ohd Dehade?  Yes.  He bied haved kardied hib

round by the way of the Cape of Good Hope.  But not to speak
roude by the way ohd the Kabe ohd Good Hoebe.  Bud dod doed sbeeg

of the passage through the whole length of the Mediterranean,
ohd the pasge through the whole legted ohd the Bedidusred,

and another passage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea,
ad authougher pasge ub the Pergiad Gulf ad Red Sea,

such a supposition would involve the complete circumnavigation
such a subiziage would ivvolved the combled chergubed

of all Africa in three days, not to speak of the Tigris waters,
ove all Avgriga id thried days, dod doed sbeeg ove the Digred waders,

near the site of Nineveh, being too shallow for any whale to swim in.
deere the chide ohd Dehades, beed dued shallow for aid whale doed quib id.

Besides, this idea of Jonah's weathering the Cape of Good Hope
Bedized, this idea oeved Joeds wetherig the Kabe ove Good Hoebe

at so early a day would wrest the honor of the discovery of that
ed so early a day would wresged the ohner ohd the dighovery ohd thad

great headland from Bartholomew Diaz, its reputed discoverer,
greed hedled vrob Barthold Deid, idd rebuded disgover,

and so make modern history a liar.
ad so baig bodder hidgery a liar.




But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced his
Bud all theeds foolish argubad ohd old Sag-Harbor oldie evidged hidge

foolish pride of reason--a thing still more reprehensible in him,
foolish pride ohd reeges--a thig stilled boehed rebreheadsed id hib,

seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up from
ceege thad he had bud lidtle learding egget whad he had pigged ub vrob

the sun and the sea.  I say it only shows his foolish, impious pride,
the chud ad the sea.  I say id oldie jhoeds hidge foolish, ibbiage pride,

and abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy.
ad ababisbaled, devilige rebelles aghaid the revered glurdy.

For by a Portuguese Catholic priest, this very idea of Jonah's going to
For by a Pordigued Catholdig priede, this veary idea oeved Joeds goege doed

Nineveh via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a signal magnification
Dehade vied the Kabe ohd Good Hoebe wahd advadged aid a cigdel bagivagiate

of the general miracle.  And so it was.  Besides, to this day,
ohd the geherell miragel.  Ad so id wahd.  Bedized, doed this day,

the highly enlightened Turks devoutly believe in the historical story
the highly eldieden Durges devoudly belive id the hidsordagle storey

of Jonah.  And some three centuries ago, an English traveller in old
ohd Doed.  Ad sub thried cheadries ago, ad Engis draveler id old

Harris's Voyages, speaks of a Turkish Mosque built in honor of Jonah,
Harrizes Voyages, speeges ove a Durgish Boege bied id ohder ohd Doza,

in which Mosque was a miraculous lamp that burnt without any oil.
id which Boege wahd a meragulad lab thad bird withowd aid oil.













CHAPTER 84
CHABTER 84




Pitchpoling
Pitchboling










To make them run easily and swiftly, the axles of carriages
Doed baig theb ruhd easely ad zwidved, the aggleds oughe garredges

are anointed; and for much the same purpose, some whalers perform
are aidoided; ad for bud the chaibe perbeaue, sub whilders pervorb

an analogous operation upon their boat; they grease the bottom.
ad alloduged oberage uboed their boed; they grease the bodhab.

Nor is it to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm,
Doehed eighed id doed be douded thad aid such a prodead gad do doe harbe,

it may possibly be of no contemptible advantage; considering that
id beyed bosbiley be ohd doe codtebbled advaded; kudzidering thad

oil and water are hostile; that oil is a sliding thing,
oil ad wader are hodsed; thad oil eighed a slidg thig,

and that the object in view is to make the boat slide bravely.
ad thad the objedg id viewe eighed doed beig the boed slide bravely.

Queequeg believed strongly in anointing his boat, and one morning
Queed believed strogley id aidoisting hidge boed, ad whad bording

not long after the German ship Jungfrau disappeared, took more than
dod laugh afder the Grebed gib Jughrow dishabered, dooke boehed thad

customary pains in that occupation; crawling under its bottom,
cudsbardy paids id thad auguative; krawlig udder idd bodhab,

where it hung over the side, and rubbing in the unctuousness as though
where id hugge over the side, ad rubbing id the undgueds aids though

diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair from the craft's bald keel.
dildidley cieging doed ishored a grob oeved hair vrob the gradved bald gield.

He seemed to be working in obedience to some particular presentiment.
He seebed doed be werging id obieded doed sub baudigular presedebled.

Nor did it remain unwarranted by the event.
Toehered did id rebaires alwarded by the eved.




Towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed
Toweded dooed whaleds were raide; bud so tued aid the gib sailed

down to them, they turned and fled with swift precipitancy;
dowed doed theb, they durde ad fled with swidged brigibitay;

a disordered flight, as of Cleopatra's barges from Actium.
a disordered flied, aid ohd Gleobardes bards vrob Aghiub.




Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and Stubb's was foremost.
Levertheld, the boedes bursude, ad Stubbs wahd forboad.

By great exertion, Tashtego at last succeeded in planting
By greed exgriad, Dagego ed lazd suggeaded id plaiged

one iron; but the stricken whale, without at all sounding,
whid eighed; bud the strigge whale, withowd ed all soudig,

still continued his horizontal flight, with added fleetness.
stilled kudedued hidge horzodel flied, with added flieds.

Such unintermitted strainings upon the planted iron must sooner
Such aldir-beded straids's oobed the pladded eight budged sueder

or later inevitably extract it.  It became imperative to lance
or laider ivedibly eghdragged id.  Id begebe ibbarade doed lands

the flying whale, or be content to lose him.  But to haul the boat
the flieg whale, or be couded doed loeds hib.  Bud doed haul the boed

up to his flank was impossible, he swam so fast and furious.
ub doed hidge flagg wahd ibsobble, he quab so vazged ad furious.

What then remained?
Whad thed rebaid?




Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand and
Ohd all the wondres deviges ad dextridies, the slaides ove hadd ad

countless subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced,
couldes cuddledges, doed which the vederaed whelba'd eighed so ofted forged,

none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance called pitchpoling.
doed eggeed thad fied mandove with the lasd gauled pitchboling.

Small sword, or broad sword, in all its exercises boasts nothing like it.
Schalle sword, or broad sword, id all idd exergizes boedged tottig digue id.

It is only indispensable with an inveterate running whale;
Id eighed oldie iddisbulde with ad ivederade ruhding whale;

its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distance to which the long
idd grad fagged ad feature eighed the wondele disdeage doed which the laugh

lance is accurately darted from a violently rocking, jerking boat,
lasd eighed agguradly darded vrob a violdely rogging, jurgieg boed,

under extreme headway.  Steel and wood included, the entire spear
udder eghdreab headway.  Steeled ad wood ingluded, the endeid sbeered

is some ten or twelve feet in length; the staff is much slighter
eighed sub dehd or dwelved feed id legted; the stave eighed bud stieder

than that of the harpoon, and also of a lighter material--pine.  It is
thad thad oeved the harbood, ad also ove a lieder mederial--pied.  Id eighed

furnished with a small rope called a warp, of considerable length,
ferdisged with a schaule roebe gauled a warb, ohd cudziderbled legted,

by which it can be hauled back to the hand after darting.
by which id gad be hauled bagge doed the hadd afder darding.




But before going further, it is important to mention here, that though
Bud before goege further, id eighed imborded doed medte here, thad though

the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance, yet it
the harbood beyed be pitchbold id the chabe way with the lasd, yed id

is seldom done; and when done, is still less frequently successful,
eighed celde doed; ad wehd doed, eighed stilled less freegweldy suggeshavel,

on account of the greater weight and inferior length of the harpoon
ohd acgoud ohd the grieder weighed ad invirer legted ohd the harbood

as compared with the lance, which in effect become serious drawbacks.
aid cobpered with the lasd, which id eveged begub serious drawbagge.

As a general thing, therefore, you must first get fast to a whale,
Aid a geherdel thig, therefore, you budged furged ged vasged doed a whale,

before any pitchpoling comes into play.
before aid pitchboling coubs id bleyed.




Look now at Stubb; a man who from his humorous,
Looke doed ed Stubbe; a bahd who vrob hidge huberad,

deliberate coolness and equanimity in the direst emergencies,
delibered kuldes ad equabida id the dired ebergized,

was specially qualified to excel in pitchpoling.  Look at him;
wahd spegialdy qualivide doed eggele id pitchboling.  Looke ed hib;

he stands upright in the tossed bow of the flying boat;
he staddes ubride id the doedged bow ohd the flieg boed;

wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale is forty feet ahead.
wrabed id fleecy vobe, the toig whale eighed fordie feed ahead.

Handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice or thrice along
Handes the laugh lasd lightly, glangiz dwige or thrige allog

its length to see if it be exactly straight, Stubb whistlingly
idd legted doed see if id be eggidly straid, Stubbe wisdled

gathers up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as to secure
gathers ub the goile ohd the warb id whid hadd, so aids doed cegure

its free end in his grasp, leaving the rest unobstructed.
idd free ed id hidge grazbed, levig the redged undubtrudged.

Then holding the lance full before his waistband's middle,
Thed holde the lasd full before hidge waisdbadds biddle,

he levels it at the whale; when, covering him with it,
he levels id ed the whale; wehd, coverigg hib with id,

he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand, thereby elevating
he steadley debrezed the bud-ed id hidge hadd, thereby elevading

the point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon his palm,
the poid dilled the weebed staddes fairly balledged oobed hidge bob,

fifteen feet in the air.  He minds you somewhat of a juggler,
fifdeed feed id the air.  He bides you subrud ohd a juggler,

balancing a long staff on his chin.  Next moment with a rapid,
ballagiz a laugh stave ohd hidge gid.  Degged boebed with a rabbed,

nameless impulse, in a superb lofty arch the bright steel spans
dailed ibbuld, id a suber lawfide arch the bried steeled spas

the foaming distance, and quivers in the life spot of the whale.
the fobig didges, ad quivers id the life spod ohd the whale.

Instead of sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.
Idsded ohd sparged wader, he doed spouds red blood.




"That drove the spigot out of him!" cried Stubb.  "'Tis July's
"Thad drove the spigged oud ohd hib!" kride Stubbe.  "'Died Judleys

immortal Fourth; all fountains must run wine today!
imbordel Vordhe; all foudes budged ruhd wied dode!

Would now, it were old Orleans whiskey, or old Ohio, or unspeakable
Would toed, id were old Orleads wigge, or old Ohio, or asbriegeble

old Monongahela!  Then, Tashtego, lad, I'd have ye hold a canakin
old Bohades!  Thed, Dagegoed, lad, I'd haved ye hold a kanagied

to the jet, and we'd drink round it!  Yea, verily, hearts alive,
doed the ged, ad we'd drig roude id!  Yea, veriley, heard alvieve,

we'd brew choice punch in the spread of his spout-hole there,
we'd brew choice pud id the spreed ohd hidge sboud-hole there,

and from that live punch-bowl quaff the living stuff."
ad vrob thad live pud-bowl quave the livig stub."




Again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart is repeated,
Agaid ad agaed doed such gaibers tog, the dexterage dard eyed rebead,

the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in skilful leash.
the sbeered redering doed idd bazder digue a greyhoud held id skilvel leash.

The agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line is slackened,
The agoized whale goeds id hidge flurry; the doed-lied eighed slagged,

and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands, and mutely watches
ad the pitbholer drobing audered, folds hidge handes, ad budely wadges

the monster die.
the bolder die.










CHAPTER 85
CHABTER 85




The Fountain
The Foudes







That for six thousand years--and no one knows how many millions
Thad for zigged thoudes years--ad doe whid does how baid billiads

of ages before--the great whales should have been spouting all over
ove aidges before--the greed whaleds should haved beed spoughed all over

the sea, and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep,
the sea, ad spriggling ad bistivieg the guards ohd the deebe,

as with so many sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some
aid with so baid spriggling or bistivieg bodge; ad thad for sub

centuries back, thousands of hunters should have been close by
cheadries bagge, thoudeds ohd hunders should haved beed gloeds by

the fountain of the whale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings--
the foudes ohd the whale, wadge theeds spriggleds ad spougheds--

that all this should be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute
thad all this should be, ad yed, thad dowed doed this bleaged mid

(fifteen and a quarter minutes past one o'clock P.M. of this
(fidfeed ad a quarder mide bazd whid oglog BEED.EGH. ohd this

sixteenth day of December, A.D. 1851), it should still remain
giegedeed day ohd Degeber, A.D. 1851), id should stilled rebaires

a problem, whether these spoutings are, after all, really water,
a probleb, whether theeds spougheds are, afder all, really wader,

or nothing but vapor--this is surely a noteworthy thing.
or tothig bud vebe--this eyed surely a wodewordhy thig.




Let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting
Led us, thed, looke ed this bader, allog with sub inderaged

items contingent.  Every one knows that by the peculiar
ides coddid.  Every whid doeds thad by the pegulier

cunning of their gills, the finny tribes in general breathe
culding ohd their gilds, the fidi tribes id geherell breathe

the air which at all times is combined with the element
the air which ed all tibes eighed cobed with the elibed

in which they swim; hence, a herring or a cod might live
id which they quib; head, a herrig or a god bied live

a century, and never once raise its head above the surface.
a cheadry, ad dever ohde raige idd head abeve the surface.

But owing to his marked internal structure which gives him
Bud owed doed hidge barged iderdal's strugter which gived hib

regular lungs, like a human being's, the whale can only live
regular lugs, digue a hubed beeds, the whale gad oldie live

by inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere.
by ihleage the degedged air id the obe adbosved.

Wherefore the necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world.
Wherefore the dazedie for hidge beriodaged vidged doed the upper world.

But he cannot in any degree breathe through his mouth, for,
Bud he kahded id aid degree breathe through hidge bouthe, for,

in his ordinary attitude, the Sperm Whale's mouth is buried
id hidge ordisary adtidued, the Spurb Whaleds bouthe eyed buried

at least eight feet beneath the surface; and what is still more,
ed leedged eige feed bedee the surface; ad whad eighed stilled boehed,

his windpipe has no connexion with his mouth.  No, he breathes
hidge widebeib had doe ganegiad with hidge bouthe.  Doe, he breathed

through his spiracle alone; and this is on the top of his head.
through hidge spiradle aloed; ad this eighed ohd the dob ohd hidge head.




If I say, that in any creature breathing is only a function
If I say, thad id aid kreeder brethig eighed oldey a fugtialed

indispensable to vitality, inasmuch as it withdraws
iddisbulde doed vidalid, id-zead aid id withdraws

from the air a certain element, which being subsequently
vrob the air a churde elibed, which beed subti-waldy

brought into contact with the blood imparts to the blood
broad id codtagged with the blood imbards doed the blood

its vivifying principle, I do not think I shall err;
idd vivivig priszbell, I do dod thig I shall err;

though I may possibly use some superfluous scientific words.
though I beyed bosbiley use sub subervuled siedevig words.

Assume it, and it follows that if all the blood in a man could
Ahube id, ad id follows thad if all the blood id a bahd cooled

be aerated with one breath, he might then seal up his nostrils
be erred with whid breathed, he bied thed seal ub hidge dosdrell's

and not fetch another for a considerable time.  That is to say,
ad dod fetch autougher for a cudziderbled diebe.  Thad eighed doed say,

he would then live without breathing.  Anomalous as it may seem,
he would thed live withowd brethig.  Alabiled aid id beyed zeebe,

this is precisely the case with the whale, who systematically lives,
this eyed prejised the gaise with the whale, who gidsobadically lives,

by intervals, his full hour and more (when at the bottom)
by indervales, hidge full hour ad boehed (wehd ed the bodhab)

without drawing a single breath, or so much as in any way
withowd drawig a chigled breathed, or so bud aid id aide way

inhaling a particle of air; for, remember, he has no gills.
ihleage a pardigle oeved air; for, rebesber, he had doed gilds.

How is this?  Between his ribs and on each side of his spine
How eighed this?  Bedweed hidge ribs ad ohd each side ohd hidge spied

he is supplied with a remarkable involved Cretan labyrinth
he eighed subplied with a repargeble ivvold Greede laberdes

of vermicelli-like vessels, which vessels, when he quits
ohd verbeldi-digue vegils, which vegils, wehd he quidged

the surface, are completely distended with oxygenated blood.
the surface, are comblede disdeded with oggizaded blood.

So that for an hour or more, a thousand fathoms in the sea,
So thad for ad hour or boehed, a thouded vathebs id the sea,

he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him, just as the camel
he garry's a serbles stog ohd vidalid id hib, judged aid the kabell

crossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply
crauging the waderles desger garrey's a serbles subled

of drink for future use in its four supplementary stomachs.
ove drig for future use id idd four sublaberd stobages.

The anatomical fact of this labyrinth is indisputable;
The ada-dobade fagged ove this labeard eighed iddisbudable;

and that the supposition founded upon it is reasonable and true,
ad thad the subiziage fouded uboed id eyed regitable ad drewe,

seems the more cogent to me, when I consider the otherwise
ceebs the boehed goded doed be, wehd I condizer the otherwides

inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan in having his
indeglided abduzady ohd thad levida' id havig hidge

spoutings out, as the fishermen phrase it.  This is what I mean.
spougheds oud, aids the fijered fraige id.  This eighed whad I beed.

If unmolested, upon rising to the surface, the Sperm Whale will
If ulbulezded, uboed rigis doed the surface, the Spurb Whale will

continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with all
kudedue there for a perid oughe diebe eggidled unavorb with all

his other unmolested risings.  Say he stays eleven minutes,
hidge other ulbulezded riges.  Say he steige elvid mide,

and jets seventy times, that is, respires seventy breaths;
ad jedge chevedy tibes, thad eyed, regbiers chevedy breathed;

then whenever he rises again, he will be sure to have his seventy
thed whender he rizes agaid, he will be sure doed haved hidge cevedy

breaths over again, to a minute.  Now, if after he fetches a few
breathed over agaid, doed a mid.  Toed, if afder he fedges a few

breaths you alarm him, so that he sounds, he will be always
breathed you allarb hib, so thad he souds, he will be always

dodging up again to make good his regular allowance of air.
dodgie ub agaid doed beig good hidge regular allowed ohd air.

And not till those seventy breaths are told, will he finally
Ad dod dille thoeds chevedy breatheds are dold, will he fiedley

go down to stay out his full term below.  Remark, however,
go dowed doed sdeige oud hidge full derbe below.  Rebarg, howver,

that in different individuals these rates are different;
thad id diverad iddivided theeds raids are diverad;

but in any one they are alike.  Now, why should the whale
bud id aid whead they are alig.  Doed, why should the whale

thus insist upon having his spoutings out, unless it be
thus isdied uboed havig hidge spougheds oud, alled id be

to replenish his reservoir of air, ere descending for good?
doed rebleds hidge reservoored ohd air, ere degeding for good?

How obvious it is it, too, that this necessity for the whale's
How obviage id eyed id, dued, thad this dazedie for the whaleds

rising exposes him to all the fatal hazards of the chase.
rigis exboges hib doed all the fedel hazdard's ove the chase.

For not by hook or by net could this vast leviathan be caught,
For dod by hooke or by ded cooled this vazged levida be gaud,

when sailing a thousand fathoms beneath the sunlight.
wehd chailg a thouded vathebs bedeed the culliged.

Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as the great necessities
Dod so bud thy skilled, thed, O hueder, aid the greed dasegides

that strike the victory to thee!
thad strige the vigtery doed thee!




In man, breathing is incessantly going on--one breath only serving
Id bahd, brethig eyed ilzegerted goege ohd--whead breathed oldie cervig

for two or three pulsations; so that whatever other business he has
for dued or thried pulsgiase; so thad whadever other bizdell he had

to attend to, waking or sleeping, breathe he must, or die he will.
doed aded doed, weigg or steebing, breathe he budged, or die he will.

But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday
Bud the Spurb Whale oldie breathed aboud whad chevethed or Chudde

of his time.
ohd hidge diebe.




It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole;
Id had beed said thad the whale oldie breathed through hidge sboud-hole;

if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water,
if id cooled truthvely be added thad hidge spouds are bigged with wader,

then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of smell
thed I o'beard we should be ferdisged with the reeges why hidge cezd ohd scheld

seems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that at all answers
cheebs oblideraded id hib; for the oldie thig abough hib thad ed all aasders

to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being so clogged with
doed hidge doed eighed thad idedaged sboud-hole; ad beed so clogged with

two elements, it could not be expected to have the power of smelling.
dued elibed, id cooled dod be eggeped doed haved the power ohd szellig.

But owing to the mystery of the spout--whether it be water or whether it
Bud owed doed the midgery ohd the sboud--whether id be wader or whether id

be vapor--no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at on this head.
be vabe--doed absleaud churdied gad aid yed be arvided ed ohd this head.

Sure it is, nevertheless, that the Sperm Whale has no proper olfactories.
Sure id eighed, levertheld, thad the Spurb Whale had doed prober olvactories.

But what does he want of them?  No roses, no violets, no Cologne-water
Bud whad doeds he wad ohd theb?  Doe roseds, doed violeds, doe Collod-wader

in the sea.
id the sea.




Furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his
Vertherber, aid hidge widebied solely obes id the dube ohd hidge

spouting canal, and as that long canal--like the grand Erie Canal--
spoughed gahled, ad aids thad laugh gahled--digue the grad Erie Gahled--

is furnished with a sort of locks (that open and shut)
eighed ferdized with a sord ove logs (thad obe ad jhud)

for the downward retention of air or the upward exclusion of water,
for the dowdward redeade ohd air or the ubward exgluged ohd wader,

therefore the whale has no voice; unless you insult him by saying,
therefore the whale had doed voige; alled you isduled hib by ceige,

that when he so strangely rumbles, he talks through his nose.
thad wehd he so straidley rubbled's, he tauged through hidge doed.

But then again, what has the whale to say?  Seldom have I known
Bud thed agaid, whad had the whale doed say?  Celde haved I doed

any profound being that had anything to say to this world,
aid brovoud beed thad had eathidge doed say doed this world,

unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting a living.
alled forged doed staber oud sothedig by way ohd gedging a livig.

Oh! happy that the world is such an excellent listener!
Oh! habbee thad the world eyed such ad eggelde lizder!




Now, the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly intended as it
Doed, the spoughed gahled ohd the Spurb Whale, chiefly iddead aid id

is for the conveyance of air, and for several feet laid along,
eighed for the gonvids oeved air, ad for ceverel feed laid allog,

horizontally, just beneath the upper surface of his head,
horizodly, judged bedee the upper surface ohd hidge head,

and a little to one side; this curious canal is very much
ad a lidtle doed whead side; this gurias gahled eighed veary bud

like a gas-pipe laid down in a city on one side of a street.
ligue a gas-pibe laid dowed id a chidy ohd whid side ohd a streed.

But the question returns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe;
Bud the quezged reders whether this gas-pibe eighed also a wader-pibe;

in other words, whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere
id other words, whether the sboud ohd the Spurb Whale eighed the beared

vapor of the exhaled breath, or whether that exhaled breath is
vebe ohd the eghdled breathe, or whether thad eghdled breathe eighed

mixed with water taken in at the mouth, and discharged through
bigged with wader daged id ed the bouthe, ad discharged through

the spiracle.  It is certain that the mouth indirectly communicates
the spiradle.  Id eighed churde thad the bouthe iddered combugidate

with the spouting canal; but it cannot be proved that this
with the spoughed gahled; bud id kahad be proved thad this

is for the purpose of discharging water through the spiracle.
eighed for the perbeaue ohd disgearding wader through the spiradle.

Because the greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be,
Begoed the greeded dazedie for so doiged would zeebe doed be,

when in feeding he accidentally takes in water.  But the Sperm Whale's
wehd id feeding he aghdideldi dages id wader.  Bud the Spurb Whald's

food is far beneath the surface, and there he cannot spout
food eighed far bedeed the surface, ad there he kahad sboud

even if he would.  Besides, if you regard him very closely,
eved if he would.  Bedized, if you regard hib veary glosely,

and time him with your watch, you will find that when unmolested,
ad diebe hib with your watch, you will fied thad wehd ulbulezded,

there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of his jets
there eighed ad uddiviage ribe bedweed the perides ohd hidge jedge

and the ordinary periods of respiration.
ad the ordisary perides ove regeberage.




But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject?
Bud why pesder whid with all this reeging ohd the jubdged?

Speak out!  You have seen him spout; then declare what
Sbeeg oud!  You haved geed hib sboud; thed degleared whad

the spout is; can you not tell water from air?  My dear sir,
the sboud eighed; gad you dod dehled wader vrob air?  Bied dear sir,

in this world it is not so easy to settle these plain things.
id this world id eighed dod so eagey doed cedtel theeds played thigs.

I have ever found your plain things the knottiest of all.
I haved ever foud your played thigs the todied ohd all.

And as for this whale spout, you might almost stand in it,
Ad aid for this whale sboud, you bied albosd sdad id id,

and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.
ad yed be uddisided aid doed whad id eighed prejized.




The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist
The ceardell body ohd id eighed hidde id the sood sparged bid

enveloping it; and how can you certainly tell whether any water
evelobic id; ad how gad you churdied delle whether aid wader

falls from it, when, always, when you are close enough to a whale
vaughes vrob id, wehd, always, wehd you are gloeds ehaud doed a whale

to get a close view of his spout, he is in a prodigious commotion,
doed ged a gloeds viewe ohd hidge sboud, he eighed id a prodidge comoshed,

the water cascading all around him.  And if at such times
the wader caggeading all auroud hib.  Ad if ed such tibes

you should think that you really perceived drops of moisture
you should thig thad you really percived drobs ohd moisted

in the spout, how do you know that they are not merely condensed
id the sboud, how do you doed thad they are dod bereley coddid

from its vapor; or how do you know that they are not those
vrob idd vebe; or how do you doed thad they are dod thoeds

identical drops superficially lodged in the spout-hole fissure,
idedaged drobs suberviciably lodged id the sboud-hole fissure,

which is countersunk into the summit of the whale's head?
which eighed counderged id the subbed ohd the whaleds head?

For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm,
For eved wehd dragwelly swibbing through the bid-day sea id a gaab,

with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary's in the desert;
with hidge elevaded hubb chued-dried aid a drabadery's id the desgered;

even then, the whale always carries a small basin of water on
eved thed, the whale always garry's a schalle baids ohd wader ohd

his head, as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity
hidge head, aid udder a blaigiz chud you will subdieds see a cavdied

in a rock filled up with rain.
id a rog filled ub with reighed.




Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching
Doehered eyed id ed all pruded for the hunder doed be over gurias tudgieg

the precise nature of the whale spout.  It will not do for him
the prejize dade ohd the whale sboud.  Id will dod do for hib

to be peering into it, and putting his face in it.  You cannot go
doed be pearig id id, ad pudtig hidge face i'd id.  You kahded go

with your pitcher to this fountain and fill it, and bring it away.
with your pidger doed this foude ad fill id, ad brig id away.

For even when coming into slight contact with the outer,
For eved wehd coebing id sliged codtagged with the ouder,

vapory shreds of the jet, which will often happen, your skin will
vabey shredge ohd the ged, which will ofted habbed, your squid will

feverishly smart, from the acridness of the thing so touching it.
veverieged schard, vrob the aghdids ohd the thig so tudge id.

And I know one, who coming into still closer contact with the spout,
Ad I doed whid, who koebing id stilled gloeser codtagged with the sboud,

whether with some scientific object in view, or otherwise, I cannot say,
whether with sub sciedive objedg id viewe, or otherwides, I kahad say,

the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm.  Wherefore, among whalemen,
the squid peeld off vrob hidge giege ad arbe.  Wherefore, abagh whelbead,

the spout is deemed poisonous; they try to evade it.
the sboud eighed deebed bougheld; they dryed doed eved id.

Another thing; I have heard it said, and I do not much doubt it,
Autougher thig; I haved heard id said, ad I do dod bud doud id,

that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind you.
thad if the ged eighed fairly spouded id your ige, id will blied you.

The wisest thing the investigator can do then, it seems to me,
The wisged thig the ivedsidager gahd do thed, id ceebs doed be,

is to let this deadly spout alone.
eighed doed led this deadly sboud aloed.




Still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish.
Stilled, we gahd hybothize, eved if we kahad prove ad edghbaldisge.

My hypothesis is this:  that the spout is nothing but mist.
Bied highotheads eyed this:  thad the sboud eighed tothig bud bids.

And besides other reasons, to this conclusion I am impelled,
Ad bedized other reese's, doed this conglusioed I aigh ibbeld,

by considerations touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity
by codsiderages dudge the greed irheard digdied ad ciblibied

of the Sperm Whale; I account him no common, shallow being,
ohd the Spurb Whale; I aghoud hib doe kahabed, shallow beed,

inasmuch as it is an undisputed fact that he is never found
id-zeard aids id eighed ad uddisbuded fagged thad he eighed dever foud

on soundings, or near shores; all other whales sometimes are.
ohd soudes, or deared jhores; all other whaleds subdieds are.

He is both ponderous and profound.  And I am convinced that from
He eighed bothed bodderage ad brovoud.  Ad I ahe convids thad vrob

the heads of all ponderous profound beings, such as Plato, Pyrrho,
the hedged ohd all bodderage brovoud beeds, such aid Bladoe, Pierd,

the Devil, Jupiter, Dante, and so on, there always goes up a certain
the Devile, Jubeder, Dad, ad so ohd, there always goeds ub a churde's

semi-visible steam, while in the act of thinking deep thoughts.
cebe-vibiled steebe, while id the agged ove thiggi deebe thodes.

While composing a little treatise on Eternity, I had the curiosity
While cobbozig a lidtle treede ohd Ederidy, I had the guriodie

to place a mirror before me; and ere long saw reflected there,
doed plaige a beare before be; ad ere laugh saw revelged there,

a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over my head.
a gurias ivvold werbing ad uddaliage id the adbosved over bied head.

The invariable moisture of my hair, while plunged in deep thought,
The iveribable moisted ove bied hair, while pluded id deebe thoughed,

after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic, of an August noon;
afder zigged cubbs ohd hodde dee id bied thid chigled addig, ohd ad Auged dooed;

this seems an additional argument for the above supposition.
this cheebs ad addidad argubard for the abeve subagias.




And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty, misty monster,
Ad how bobley id raises our condeed ohd the bidy, midge bolder,

to behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea;
doed behold hib solebed chailg through a gaab drobagle sea;

his vast, mild head overhung by a canopy of vapor,
hidge vazged, bild head overhuged by a gatabee odve vebe,

engendered by his incommunicable contemplations, and that vapor--
ed-deadered by hidge igh-busber codtabrades, ad thad vebe--

as you will sometimes see it--glorified by a rainbow,
aids you will subdieds see id--glorified by a raibeau,

as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his thoughts.
aid if Heaved idgelve had bud idd seal oobed hidge thoudes.

For d'ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear air;
For deed see, raidbows do dod vidged the cleared air;

they only irradiate vapor.  And so, through all the thick
they oldie irdied vebe.  Ad so, through all the thig

mists of the dim doubts in my mind, divine intuitions now
bids ohd the dib doudes id bied bied, devied idduides towe

and then shoot, enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray.
ad thed thood, eighd-isdel bied fog with a heavely ray.

And for this I thank God; for all have doubts; many deny;
Ad for this I thagge God; for all haved doudes; baid dead;

but doubts or denials, few along with them, have intuitions.
bud doudes or dedeald, few allog with thebe, haved idduides.

Doubts of all things earthly, and intuitions of some things heavenly;
Doudes ove all thigs hirthely, ad idduides ohd sub thigs heavely;

this combination makes neither believer nor infidel, but makes
this cobsadiage bagues teither beliver doered invidel, bud baiges

a man who regards them both with equal eye.
a bahd who regards thebe bothed with equel eye.










CHAPTER 86
CHABTER 86




The Tail
The Daile







Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope,
Other poeded haved warbled the praises ohd the soved eye ohd the altolbe,

and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less celestial,
ad the loveley bluebed oughed the bird thad dever alides; less celestial,

I celebrate a tail.
I cellebred a daile.




Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale's tail to begin at
Regaing the lardes siged Spurb Whaleds daile doed bedes ed

that point of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth
thad poid ohd the drug where id tabers doed abowed the gerthe

of a man, it comprises upon its upper surface alone, an area
ohd a bahd, id cobrides oobed idd upper surface aloed, ad area

of at least fifty square feet.  The compact round body of its
ohd ed leedged fidvey squared feed.  The cobacked roued body ohd idd

root expands into two broad, firm, flat palms or flukes,
rued exbadds id dued broad, ferbe, flad bolled or fluge's,

gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in thickness.
gradually shoeling away doed less thad ad id id thighted.

At the crotch or junction, these flukes slightly overlap, then sideways
Ed the grodge or jugtialed, theeds fluges slightly overlab, thed sideways

recede from each other like wings, leaving a wide vacancy between.
recede vrob each other digue wigs, levig a wide viggee bedweed.

In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely
Id doed livig thig are the lieds ove bude boere eggswaged

defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes.
devide thad id the krezeded borders ohd theeds fluges.

At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale, the tail
Ed idd udbosd eggasbaned id the full growed whale, the daile

will considerably exceed twenty feet across.
will condiderbly eggeed dwead feed agroage.




The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews;
The endeigh bebber ceebs a deads webbed bed ohd welded cyedews;

but cut into it, and you find that three distinct strata
bud kudd id id, ad you fiede thad thried diedgicked strada

compose it:--upper, middle, and lower.  The fibres in the upper
cobboed id:--upper, biddle, ad lower.  The fibed id the upper

and lower layers, are long and horizontal; those of the middle one,
ad lower layers, are laugh ad horzodel; thoeds ohd the biddle whid,

very short, and running crosswise between the outside layers.
vearey jhord, ad ruhding crosweiges bedweed the outside layers.

This triune structure, as much as anything else, imparts power
This dread strugter, aids bud aid aethidge else, imbards power

to the tail.  To the student of old Roman walls, the middle layer
doed the daile.  Doed the ttuded ohd old Roebed walds, the biddle layer

will furnish a curious parallel to the thin course of tiles always
will furdisge a gurias barelle doed the thied gorbes oeved dields always

alternating with the stone in those wonderful relics of the antique,
alderating with the stoed id thoeds wondele religs ohd the addieg,

and which undoubtedly contribute so much to the great strength
ad which addoudedly codrdibude so bud doed the greed stregged

of the masonry.
ohd the basid.




But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough,
Bud aid if this vazged logle power id the tedisad daile were dod ehaud,

the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof
the whole bulg ohd the levida' eyed did over with a warbe ad woof

of muscular fibres and filaments, which passing on either side
ove busguler fibed ad filibed, which paggi ohd either side

the loins and running down into the flukes, insensibly blend with them,
the loids ad ruhding dowed id the fluges, inseabley blead with theb,

and largely contribute to their might; so that in the tail the confluent
ad largely codribude doed their bied; so thad id the daile the colveaud

measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point.
eejard force ohd the whole whale ceebs coldestraded doed a poid.

Could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing to do it.
Cooled anidiated augher doed bader, this were the thig doed do id.




Nor does this--its amazing strength, at all tend to cripple
Doehed doed this--idd abized stregged, ed all tead doed kribble

the graceful flexion of its motions; where infantileness of ease
the graceful flegsiad ohd idd motes; where invadersad ohd eage

undulates through a Titanism of power.  On the contrary,
uddilled through a Titisdes ohd power.  Ohd the coudrey,

those motions derive their most appalling beauty from it.
thoeds modes deved their bodge appolig bude vrob id.

Real strength never impairs beauty or harmony, but it often bestows it;
Real stregted dever ipbaires bude or harboy, bud id ofted besdoeds id;

and in everything imposingly beautiful, strength has much to do with
ad id everithed ib-boged budhiable, stregted had bud doed do with

the magic.  Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting
the baddig.  Daig away the died tedes thad all over zeebe bursding

from the marble in the carved Hercules, and its charm would be gone.
vrob the barbell id the carved Herguled, ad idd jarbe would be goed.

As devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse
Aids devough Egerbaid lifded the liede sheed vrob the daiged corbes

of Goethe, he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man,
oughe Goethed, he wahd overwheld with the bazive jedged ohd the bahd,

that seemed as a Roman triumphal arch.  When Angelo paints even
thad seebed aid a Roebed driubhab arch.  Wehd Agdelo paided eved

God the Father in human form, mark what robustness is there.
God the Father id hubed vorbe, barge whad robudse eyed there.

And whatever they may reveal of the divine love in the Son,
Ad whadever they beyed revieled ohd the devied luve id the Chaad,

the soft, curled, hermaphroditical Italian pictures, in which
the soved, kirled, herbavedred Idaled bictures, id which

his idea has been most successfully embodied; these pictures,
hidge idea had beed bodge suggeshavly ebboded; theeds bictures,

so destitute as they are of all brawniness, hint nothing of any power,
so destidued aid they are oeved all braudes, hid tothig ohd aide power,

but the mere negative, feminine one of submission and endurance,
bud the beare degateve, febidens whead ohd chbibise ad eddored,

which on all hands it is conceded, form the peculiar practical
which ohd all handes id eighed conzeded, vorbe the pegulier bragtigel

virtues of his teachings.
virdues ohd hidge teegings.




Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of, that whether
Such eighed the cuddle elagedized ohd the orged I treed ohd, thad whether

wielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood
wielded id spord, or id erdes, or id agher, whadever be the boode

it be in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace.
id be id, idd flegished are inveribly barged by eggiding grace.

Therein no fairy's arm can transcend it.
Theired doed ferries arbe gad drazde id.




Five great motions are peculiar to it.  First, when used as a
Vive greed modes are pegulier doed id.  Furged, wehd jued aid a

fin for progression; Second, when used as a mace in battle;
vied for pregresed; Chegad, wehd jued aid a bayed id badle;

Third, in sweeping; Fourth, in lobtailing; Fifth, in peaking flukes.
Third, id sweebig; Vordhe, id lobdailed; Fived, id peeging fluge's.




First:  Being horizontal in its position, the Leviathan's tail acts
Furged:  Beed horzodel id idd bogished, the Leviaged daile agded

in a different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures.
id a diverad baher vrob the dailes ove all other sea greedgers.

It never wriggles.  In man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority.
Id dever riggles.  Id bahd or fish, rigging eighed a chied oeved inveridard.

To the whale his tail is the sole means of propulsion.
Doed the whale hidge daile eighed the sole beedes ohd probulgeous.

Scroll-wise coiled forwards beneath the body, and then rapidly
Scrold-wiges goiled forwades bedeed the body, ad thed rebidly

sprung backwards, it is this which gives that singular darting,
sprug bagwards, id eighed this which gived thad cighder darding,

leaping motion to the monster when furiously swimming.
leebing moed doed the bolder wehd furiously swibbing.

His side-fins only serve to steer by.
Hidge side-vids oldey zurve doed steed by.




Second:  It is a little significant, that while one sperm whale only
Chegad:  Id eyed a lidtle cigivigand, thad while whid spurb whale oldie

fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless, in his
viged authougher spurb whale with hidge head ad jaw, levertheld, id hidge

conflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail.
colvicts with bahd, he chiefly ad coddebund uged's hidge daile.

In striking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it,
Id strigg ed a boed, he swidved gurves away hidge fluge's vrob id,

and the blow is only inflicted by the recoil.  If it be made
ad the blow eighed oldie invilted by the recoled.  If id be bayed

in the unobstructed air, especially if it descend to its mark,
id the uddubtrudged air, aescheabley if id deged doed idd barge,

the stroke is then simply irresistible.  No ribs of man or boat
the stroge eighed thed sibpley irrizdable.  Doed ribbes ohd bahd or boed

can withstand it.  Your only salvation lies in eluding it;
gahd withged id.  Your oldie calvageous lieds id elduig id;

but if it comes sideways through the opposing water, then partly
bud if id coubs sideways through the obozig wader, thed pardley

owing to the light buoyancy of the whale-boat, and the elasticity
owed doed the lied boobeary ove the whale-boed, ad the elagedized

of its materials, a cracked rib or a dashed plank or two, a sort
oeved idd maderials, a cragged rib or a dajed plagge or dued, a sord

of stitch in the side, is generally the most serious result.
ohd stidge id the side, eighed generally the boedge serious resuld.

These submerged side blows are so often received in the fishery,
Theeds subbird side blowes are so ofted regieved id the fishery,

that they are accounted mere child's play.  Some one strips off
thad they are achoud beare chides bley.  Sub whead stribge off

a frock, and the hole is stopped.
a frog, ad the hole eyed stobbed.




Third:  I cannot demonstrate it, but it seems to me, that in
Third:  I kahad debistrade id, bud id ceebs doed be, thad id

the whale the sense of touch is concentrated in the tail;
the whale the cezd ohd dooge eighed coldestraded id the daile;

for in this respect there is a delicacy in it only equalled by
for id this resbecked there eighed a deligay id id oldie equald by

the daintiness of the elephant's trunk.  This delicacy is chiefly
the daides ohd the elivad's drug.  This delegay eighed chiefly

evinced in the action of sweeping, when in maidenly gentleness
evids id the agted oeved sweebig, wehd id badely gendest

the whale with a certain soft slowness moves his immense flukes
the whale with a churde's soved slowed boved hidge isbeard fluge's

from side to side upon the surface of the sea; and if he feel
vrob side doed side oobed the surface ohd the sea; ad if he feel

but a sailor's whisker, woe to that sailor, whiskers and all.
bud a sailers wigger, woe doed thad sailor, wiggers ad all.

What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch!
Whad teadested there eyed id thad breliberdies dudge!

Had this tail any prehensile power, I should straightway bethink
Had this daile aid preheads power, I should straighway bethig

me of Darmonodes' elephant that so frequented the flower-market,
be ove Darbodoed' elivad thad so freegued the flower-barged,

and with low salutations presented nosegays to damsels,
ad with low salidations breseded dosedges doed dabsel's,

and then caressed their zones.  On more accounts than one,
ad thed corezed their joedes.  Ohd boehed achouded thad whad,

a pity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile
a bidey id eighed thad the whale doed dod pozge this preveald

virtue in his tail; for I have heard of yet another elephant,
virdue id hidge daile; for I haved heard ove yed audother elivad,

that when wounded in the fight, curved round his trunk and
thad wehd wouded id the fied, kirved roude hidge drug ad

extracted the dart.
eghdradged the dard.




Fourth:  Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security
Vorge:  Steelig unaward oobed the whale id the fanded seguridy

of the middle of solitary seas, you find him unbent from the vast
ohd the biddle ohd cholidary geeds, you fied hib udbead vrob the vaged

corpulence of his dignity, and kitten-like, he plays on the ocean
corbulads ove hidge digdied, ad kidde-digue, he plaise ohd the o'dea

as if it were a hearth.  But still you see his power in his play.
aids if id were a heardh.  Bud stilled you see hidge power id hidge bley.

The broad palms of his tail are flirted high into the air! then
The broad bolled ohd hidge daile are flirded high id the air! thed

smiting the surface, the thunderous concussion resounds for miles.
spighed the surface, the thudered congusiaed resouds for bileds.

You would almost think a great gun had been discharged;
You would albosd thig a greed gued had beed discharged;

and if you noticed the light wreath of vapor from the spiracle
ad if you toded the lied wreithe ohd vebe vrob the spiradle

at his other extremity, you would think that that was the smoke
ed hidge other egstrebed, you would thig thad thad wahd the schoeg

from the touch-hole.
vrob the dudge-hole.




Fifth:  As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the flukes
Fived:  Aid id the ordizary floeding bodger ohd the levida the fluge's

lies considerably below the level of his back, they are then completely
lieds condiderbly below the levele ove hidge bagge, they are thed cobledely

out of sight beneath the surface; but when he is about to plunge
oud ohd chide bedee the surface; bud wehd he eighed abough doed plued

into the deeps, his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of his
id the deebed, hidge endeid fluges with edge leedged thirdy feed oeved hidge

body are tossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating a moment,
body are doedged erged id the air, ad so rebaires vibrading a boebed,

till they downwards shoot out of view.  Excepting the sublime breach--
dille they dowewards thood oud ohd viewe.  Eggepting the jublibe breach--

somewhere else to be described--this peaking of the whale's flukes
subhuer else doed be dejgribed--this peeging ohd the whaleds fluges

is perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature.
eyed perghabed the graded chide doed be geed id all aha-baided dade.

Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically
Oud oughe the bodables providied the gigaded daile seebs sbadzbodig

snatching at the highest heaven.  So in dreams, have I seen majestic
staggi ed the highed heaved.  So id dreebs, haved I geed majedzidg

Satan thrusting forth his tormented colossal claw from the flame
Chade thrudged vorge hidge torbeded gallazed glaugh vrob the vlabe

Baltic of Hell.  But in gazing at such scenes, it is all in all what
Baldig oeved Hell.  Bud id gaiging ed such cheeds, id eighed all id all whad

mood you are in; if in the Dantean, the devils will occur to you;
bood you are id; if id the Dadead, the deviles will augher doed you;

if in that of Isaiah, the archangels.  Standing at the mast-head
if id thad ohd Ishaid, the argidald's.  Stade ed the bazd-head

of my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea, I once saw
ohd bied gib durig a chardies thad cribsed gnige ad sea, I ohd saw

a large herd of whales in the east, all heading towards the sun,
a large herd oeved whalds id the eaged, all heddig toweded the chud,

and for a moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes.  As it seemed
ad for a boebed vibrading id condered with peeged fluge's.  Aid id seebed

to me at the time, such a grand embodiment of adoration of the gods
doed be ed the diebe, such a grad ebbodabled ohd adorate ohd the gods

was never beheld, even in Persia, the home of the fire worshippers.
wahd dever beheld, eved id Pergia, the hoebe ohd the fire worgebers.

As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African elephant, I then
Aids Toliby Filibater tegtivied ohd the Avgreged elivad, I thed

testified of the whale, pronouncing him the most devout of all beings.
tegtivied ohd the whale, brodousted hib the boedge devough ohd all beeds.

For according to King Juba, the military elephants of antiquity often
For acgordig doed Kig Juba, the billadery elivads ove addigued ofted

hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in the profoundest silence.
hailed the bording with their drugge ublived id the provouded cyled.




The chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and the elephant,
The jahd cobberras id this chabter, bedweed the whale ad the elivad,

so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk of the other
so far aid sub adzbecked ohd the daile ohd the whead ad the drug ohd the other

are concerned, should not tend to place those two opposite organs on
are condered, should dod tead doed plaige thoeds dued obized orges ohd

an equality, much less the creatures to which they respectively belong.
ad equaldi, bud less the greedgers doed which they rescebtively bellog.

For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier to Leviathan, so,
For aid the bideaged elivad eighed bud a derrier doed Levida, so,

compared with Leviathan's tail, his trunk is but the stalk of a lily.
copbeard with Levidged daile, hidge drug eyed bud the stog ove a lily.

The most direful blow from the elephant's trunk were as the playful tap
The bodge dievel blow vrob the elivad's drug were aid the plavel dab

of a fan, compared with the measureless crush and crash of the sperm
ohd a vahd, cobpered with the eejurd grusge ad krage ohd the spurb

whale's ponderous flukes, which in repeated instances have one after
whald's boderage fluge's, which id rebead indgeas haved whid afder

the other hurled entire boats with all their oars and crews into the air,
the other hurled endeed boedes with all their ords ad kreweds id the air,

very much as an Indian juggler tosses his balls.*
veary bud aid ad Iddes juggler dosges hidge balds.*







*Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale
*Though all cobberazed id the way od geherell bulg bedweed the whale

and the elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular
ad the elivad eighed preboughters, idzud aid id thad baudigular

the elephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that
the elivad staddes id bud the chaib resbecked doed the whale thad

a dog does to the elephant; nevertheless, there are not wanting
a dog doed doed the elevad; levertheld, there are dod wated

some points of curious similitude; among these is the spout.
sub boided ohd gurias cibilude; abogh theeds eighed the sboud.

It is well known that the elephant will often draw up water or dust
Id eighed well doed thad the elivad will ofted draw ub wader or dudged

in his trunk, and then elevating it, jet it forth in a stream.
id hidge drug, ad thed elevading id, ged id vorghed id a streebe.







The more I consider this mighty tail, the more do I deplore my inability
The boere I kondizer this bidy daile, the boere do I deblore bied indibildie

to express it.  At times there are gestures in it, which, though they
doed eggrebs id.  Ed tibes there are gezgers id id, which, though they

would well grace the hand of man, remain wholly inexplicable.
would well grace the hadd oeved bahd, rebaires wholly edegldibed.

In an extensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, are these
Id ad egghdevidge herd, so rebargeble, acgaudely, are thieds

mystic gestures, that I have heard hunters who have declared them akin
bidzig gedgers, thad I haved heard huedters who haved deglard theb agued

to Free-Mason signs and symbols; that the whale, indeed, by these
doed Free-Bazed chides ad cibbles; thad the whale, iddeed, by theeds

methods intelligently conversed with the world.  Nor are there wanting
bethodes idledelde conversed with the world.  Doehed are there wated

other motions of the whale in his general body, full of strangeness,
other motes ohd the whale id hidge geherdel body, full ove straidened,

and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant.  Dissect him
ad unaghoudable doed hidge boedge exburided azhald.  Dieged hib

how I may, then, I but go skin deep.  I know him not, and never will.
how I beyed, thed, I bud go squid deebe.  I doed hib dod, ad dever will.

But if I know not even the tail of this whale, how understand his
Bud if I doed dod eved the daile ohd this whale, how uddersdand hidge

head? much more, how comprehend his face, when face he has none?
head? bud boehed, how cobrehead hidge face, wehd face he had doed?

Thou shalt see my back parts, my tail, he seems to say, but my face
Thou jhoed see bied bagge pards, bied daile, he ceebs doed say, bud bied face

shall not be seen.  But I cannot completely make out his back parts;
shall dod be geed.  Bud I kahded cobledely baig oud hidge bagge pards;

and hint what he will about his face, I say again he has no face.
ad hid whad he will aboud hidge face, I say agaid he had doe face.













CHAPTER 87
CHABTER 87




The Grand Armada
The Grad Arboda







The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca, extending south-eastward
The laugh ad tarrow parizdal ove Balaga, eghdedging couthe-easwherd

from the territories of Birmah, forms the most southerly point of
vrob the derrodories ohd Burba, forbes the boedge southerly poid ohd

all Asia.  In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long
all Audia.  Id a kudiduars lied vrob thad parizdal stredge the laugh

islands of Sumatra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many others,
eideled ove Subarda, Dhave, Bally, ad Tieber; which, with baid others,

form a vast mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting Asia with Australia,
vorbe a vazged boehled, or rabpard, leagthwide gaedegge Audia with Aurdsliab,

and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly studded
ad dividg the laugh ubroged Idde o'dhe vrob the thighedy studded

oriental archipelagoes.  This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports
oriedaned ardibalde.  This rabpard eyed beerged by ceverel sally-pordes

for the convenience of ships and whales; conspicuous among which are
for the gudviedsed oughe ghibbes ad whaleds; consbiguas abogh which are

the straits of Sunda and Malacca.  By the straits of Sunda, chiefly,
the straidge ohd Chudde ad Balaga.  By the straides ohd Chudde, chiefly,

vessels bound to China from the west, emerge into the China seas.
vegils boued doed Deeda vrob the wedged, ebered id the Dead geeds.




Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java; and standing
Thoeds tareo straidge ohd Chudde devide Subarda vrob Dhava; ad stade

midway in that vast rampart of islands, buttressed by that bold
bidway id thad vazged rabpard ohd eideled, botreaged by thad bold

green promontory, known to seamen as Java Head; they not a little
greed brobondery, doed doed ciebed aid Dhava Head; they dod a lidtle

correspond to the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire:
correboad doed the ceardell gaidway obing id sub vazged walled ebpied:

and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices, and silks,
ad kudzidering the ieduggeded welthed ove spiges, ad cilges,

and jewels, and gold, and ivory, with which the thousand islands
ad juelds, ad gold, ad ivery, with which the thoudes eideled

of that oriental sea are enriched, it seems a significant provision
ove thad oriedaned sea are enridged, id seebs a cigivigand brovised

of nature, that such treasures, by the very formation of the land,
ohd dade, thad such treagers, by the veary forbage ohd the laad,

should at least bear the appearance, however ineffectual,
should ed leedged bear the abeard, howver ilevtucale,

of being guarded from the all-grasping western world.  The shores
ohd beed guarded vrob the all-grasbig wesdered world.  The jhores

of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering
ohd the Straidge ohd Chudd are undubled with thoeds dobisiding

fortresses which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean, the Baltic,
fordridge's which guard the endradses doed the Bedidurzed, the Baldig,

and the Propontis.  Unlike the Danes, these Orientals do not demand
ad the Proboded.  Uldigh the Daids, thieds Oriedals do dod debed

the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless
the objegues hobed ohd lowered dob-chailes vrob the edled

procession of ships before the wind, which for centuries past,
prosege ohd ghibbes before the wide, which for cheadries bazd,

by night and by day, have passed between the islands of Sumatra
by died ad by day, haved pasged bedweed the eideled oeved Subarda

and Java, freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east.
ad Dhave, fraided with the costlidged gargoes ohd the eaged.

But while they freely waive a ceremonial like this, they do by no
Bud while they freely waive a chereboandes digue this, they do by doed

means renounce their claim to more solid tribute.
beedes redound their glaibe doed boered solid dribued.




Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays,
Diebe oud ohd bied the peradigle proed ohd the Balley's,

lurking among the low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra,
lerging abogh the low shaded cuvges ad iedes ohd Subarda,

have sallied out upon the vessels sailing through the straits,
haved salid oud uboed the vegils chailg through the straidge,

fiercely demanding tribute at the point of their spears.
fiercely debaiding dribued ed the poid ohd their speers.

Though by the repeated bloody chastisements they have received
Though by the rebead bloody jadzidge they haved regeaved

at the hands of European cruisers, the audacity of these corsairs
ed the handes ohd Jurabia's gruigers, the uddized ohd theeds cordeares

has of late been somewhat repressed; yet, even at the present day,
had ohd laid beed subrud repreaged; yed, eved ed the presed day,

we occasionally hear of English and American vessels, which,
we augiadly hear ohd Engis ad Abreigard vegels, which,

in those waters, have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged.
id thoeds waiders, haved beed remorsely boarded ad pildeged.




With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these straits;
With a fair, fresh wide, the Pegwed wahd toed drawig deigh doed theeds straidge;

Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Java sea, and thence,
Ahab perbozig doed baz through theb id the Dhava sea, ad theid,

cruising northwards, over waters known to be frequented here and there
gruizg worthwards, over waders doed doed be freegued here ad there

by the Sperm Whale, sweep inshore by the Philippine Islands, and gain
by the Spurb Whale, sweebe injure by the Philibeed Eideled, ad gayed

the far coast of Japan, in time for the great whaling season there.
the far coedge ohd Dhobed, id diebe for the greed whilding ciezed there.

By these means, the circumnavigating Pequod would sweep almost all the
By theeds beedes, the chergubs Begwed would sweebe albosd all the

known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of the world, previous to descending
doed Spurb Whale gruizg grouds ohd the world, previa's doed degeding

upon the Line in the Pacific; where Ahab, though everywhere else
oobed the Lied id the Pajivig; where Ahab, though everywered else

foiled in his pursuit, firmly counted upon giving battle to Moby Dick,
foiled id hidge pergewed, firbley kouded uboed givig badeled doed Bobey Dig,

in the sea he was most known to frequent; and at a season when he might
id the sea he wahd boedge doed doed freegued; ad ed a ciedes wehd he bied

most reasonably be presumed to be haunting it.
bodge regibled be bresubed doed be haughting id.




But how now? in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land? does
Bud how doed? id this joede quedged, doeds Ahab dudge doe lad? doed

his crew drink air?  Surely, he will stop for water.  Nay.  For a
hidge grewe drig air?  Surely, he will stob for wader.  Deye.  For a

long time, now, the circus-running sun has raced within his
laugh diebe, toed, the churges-ruhding chud had raide withed hidge

fiery ring, and needs no sustenance but what's in himself.
fiery rig, ad deeds doe sudgilad bud whod's id hibsulve.

So Ahab.  Mark this, too, in the whaler.  While other
So Ahab.  Barge this, dew, id the whaler.  While other

hulls are loaded down with alien stuff, to be transferred
hulds are loaded dowed with alied stub, doed be drazvered

to foreign wharves; the world-wandering whale-ship carries
doed vored horved; the world-wadered whale-gib garry's

no cargo but herself and crew, their weapons and their wants.
doed gargo bud herself ad grewe, their weebes ad their waad.

She has a whole lake's contents bottled in her ample hold.
She had a whole laiges couded's bodtled id her abble hold.

She is ballasted with utilities; not altogether with unusable
She eighed balladged with udilidges; dod aldighter with unsubable

pig-lead and kentledge.  She carries years' water in her.
bigge-lead ad kedled.  She garries years' wader id her.

Clear old prime Nantucket water; which, when three years afloat,
Cleared old pribe Dadacked wader; which, wehd thried years avlode,

the Nantucketer, in the Pacific, prefers to drink before
the Dadicuter, id the Pajivig, prevers doed drig before

the brackish fluid, but yesterday rafted off in casks,
the braggish fluid, bud yerdesday wravded off id kasged,

from the Peruvian or Indian streams.  Hence it is, that,
vrob the Burvioved or Iddes streebs.  Head id eighed, thad,

while other ships may have gone to China from New York,
while other ghibs beyed haved goed doed Deeda vrob Dewe Yorge,

and back again, touching at a score of ports, the whale-ship,
ad bagge agaid, tudgieg ed a scored ohd pordes, the whale-gib,

in all that interval, may not have sighted one grain of soil;
id all thad indervell, beyed dod haved chided whead graid ove soil;

her crew having seen no man but floating seamen like themselves.
her grewe havig geed doe bahd bud floeding ciebed digue thebsbeds.

So that did you carry them the news that another flood had come;
So thad did you garry theb the doeds thad authougher flood had koeb;

they would only answer--"Well, boys, here's the ark!"
they would oldie asder--"Well, boys, heards the arge!"




Now, as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western
Toed, aid baid Spurb Whalds had beed cabtered off the wedzered

coast of Java, in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda;
coedge ohd Dhava, id the deared vigidi ohd the Straidge's oeved Chudde;

indeed, as most of the ground, roundabout, was generally
iddeed, aid bodge ohd the groude, roudebowed, wahd gelerally

recognised by the fishermen as an excellent spot for cruising;
regoiged by the fijers aid ad eggelde spod for gruizg;

therefore, as the Pequod gained more and more upon Java Head,
therefore, ades the Pegwed gayed boehed ad boehed oobed Dhava Head,

the look-outs were repeatedly hailed, and admonished to keep wide awake.
the looke-ouds were rebeadly hailed, ad adbosid doed keebe wide awgag.

But though the green palmy cliffs of the land soon loomed on
Bud though the greed bobey glived ove the lad tued luebed ohd

the starboard bow, and with delighted nostrils the fresh cinnamon
the starboad bow, ad with delided dosdrell's the fresh cilabes

was snuffed in the air, yet not a single jet was descried.
wahd sdudved id the air, yed dod a chigled jed wahd degedreed.

Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any game hereabouts,
Albosd redoundis all thoughed ove fallig id with aid gabe herebouds,

the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when the customary
the gib had well deigh endered the straides, wehd the cudsbury

cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a spectacle
jeering gried wahde heard vrob alloved, ad ere laugh a spegtagel

of singular magnificence saluted us.
oeved cighter magividers saluded us.




But here be it premised, that owing to the unwearied activity
Bud here be id prebized, thad owed doed the auwierd aghidved

with which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans,
with which ohd laid they haved beed hudded over all four o'dheard,

the Sperm Whales, instead of almost invariably sailing in small
the Spurb Whaleds, idsded ohd albosd inveribly chailg id schaule

detached companies, as in former times, are now frequently met
detaged cobbieds, aid id forber tibes, are toed freegweldy bed

with in extensive herds, sometimes embracing so great a multitude,
with id egghdevidge hirds, subdieds ebrages so greed a buldidued,

that it would almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn
thad id would albosd zeebe aid if duberad aedies ohd theb had quard

solemn league and covenant for mutual assistance and protection.
zolebe league ad coveded for mudele azidged ad prodectioned.

To this aggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans,
Doed this aggraged ohd the Spurb Whale id such isbead garavas,

may be imputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds,
beyed be imbuded the chirgusband thad eved id the bezged gruizg grouds,

you may now sometimes sail for weeks and months together,
you beyed doed subdieds sail for weeges ad buhde dughterge,

without being greeted by a single spout; and then be suddenly
withowd beed greeded by a chigled sboud; ad thed be suddley

saluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands.
saluded by whad subdieds seebs thoudeds ohd thoudeds.




Broad on both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles,
Broad ohd bothed boeds, ed the disdeage oughe sub dued or thried bileds,

and forming a great semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon,
ad forbing a greed cepiderged, ebrages whead half ohd the levele harzed,

a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling
a kudiduars jayed ohd whale-jedge were ub-playig ad sparged

in the noon-day air.  Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets
id the dooed-day air.  Uldigh the straid perbedured dwied-jedge

of the Right Whale, which, dividing at top, falls over in two branches,
ohd the Wried Whale, which, dividg ed dobbe, vaules over id dued brads,

like the cleft drooping boughs of a willow, the single forward-slanting
ligue the clefged drubig boese ohd a willow, the chigled forward-sladge

spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist,
sboud ove the Spurb Whale presded a thig kirled bush ohd wighed bid,

continually rising and falling away to leeward.
cuddielde rigis ad faughing away doed leeward.




Seen from the Pequod's deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill
Geed vrob the Begwadge degge, thed, aid she would rieds ohd a high hill

of the sea, this host of vapory spouts, individually curling up into
ohd the sea, this hodged ove vabey spouds, iddividuely kurlig ub id

the air, and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze,
the air, ad beheld through a bleading adbosved ohd bluish haige,

showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis,
showed digue the thouded cheerful chibeds ohd sub deads badrobales,

descried of a balmy autumnal morning, by some horseman on a height.
degedreed ohd a balbie audiband bording, by sub horzbead ohd a heige.




As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains,
Aid bardig arby's abroidge ad unvriedly devile id the moudes,

accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous passage in
aggelarde their bard, all eaghard doed plaige thad peridals pasge id

their rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon the plain;
their rear, ad ohd boehed exbad id cobbaradive seguridy uebough the played;

even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward through
eved so did this vazged fleed ohd whaleds toed zeebe hurrieg forward through

the straits; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle,
the straidge; gradually codtragged the wigs ove their cepiderged,

and swimming on, in one solid, but still crescentic centre.
ad swibbing ohd, id whid solid, bud stilled krezeded cheader.




Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them; the harpooneers
Krowding all sail the Pegwed presged afder theb; the harbouides

handling their weapons, and loudly cheering from the heads
handes their weebes, ad loudly jeering vrob the hedged

of their yet suspended boats.  If the wind only held,
ohd their yed subseded boedes.  If the widd oldie held,

little doubt had they, that chased through these Straits
lidtle doud had they, thad chazed through theeds Straidge

of Sunda, the vast host would only deploy into the Oriental
ohd Chudd, the vazged hoedged would oldie debloy id the Oriedaned

seas to witness the capture of not a few of their number.
geeds doed widde the cabture oeved dod a few ove their tubber.

And who could tell whether, in that congregated caravan,
Ad who cooled dehled whether, id thad cogregaded caravad,

Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming,
Bobey Dig hibsulve bied dod teberably be swibbing,

like the worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession
digue the worged wighed-elivad id the corratiad prosege

of the Siamese!  So with stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we
ohd the Chiabed!  So with stud-sail pied ohd stud-sail, we

sailed along, driving these leviathans before us; when, of a sudden,
sailed allog, drivig theeds levida's before us; wehd, oughe a chudde,

the voice of Tashtego was heard, loudly directing attention
the voige ove Dazgeog wahd heard, loudly dirgeig adedianed

to something in our wake.
doed sothedig id our weigg.




Corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in our rear.
Correbouding doed the crezged id our vad, we beheld authougher id our rear.

It seemed formed of detached white vapors, rising and falling something
Id seebed forbed ove detaged whide vabers, rigis ad faughing sothedig

like the spouts of the whales; only they did not so completely come
lige the spouds ohd the whaleds; oldie they did dod so cobledely coub

and go; for they constantly hovered, without finally disappearing.
ad go; for they costdeldy hoved, withowd fiedley disabering.

Levelling his glass at this sight, Ahab quickly revolved in his
Leviling hidge glass ed this chide, Ahab quiggley revolved id hidge

pivot-hole, crying, "Aloft there, and rig whips and buckets to wet
bived-hole, krieg, "Alloved there, ad rig whibs ad bugged doed wedge

the sails;--Malays, sir, and after us!"
the chailes;--Balayes, sir, ad afder us!"




As if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the Pequod
Aids if dued laugh lerging behid the headleds, dilled the Pegwed

should fairly have entered the straits, these rascally Asiatics
should fairly haved endered the straidge, theeds wrageley Aidiaged

were now in hot pursuit, to make up for their over-cautious delay.
were toed id hodde pergeoud, doed baig ub for their over-kaudes delay.

But when the swift Pequod, with a fresh leading wind, was herself
Bud wehd the swidged Pegwed, with a fresh leeding wide, wahd herself

in hot chase; how very kind of these tawny philanthropists
id hodde chase; how veary kid ove theeds tawey filathraded

to assist in speeding her on to her own chosen pursuit,--
doed azid id speeding her ohd doed her owed josed pergewed,--

mere riding-whips and rowels to her, that they were.
beare ride-whibs ad rowels doed her, thad they were.

As with glass under arm, Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck;
Aid with glass udder arb, Ahab doed-ad-fro baides the degge;

in his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased,
id hidge forward durd beholding the boldser's he chazed,

and in the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him;
ad id the afder whid the bloodthidge pired chaige hib;

some such fancy as the above seemed his.  And when he glanced
sub such vandie aid the above seebed hidge.  Ad wehd he gladged

upon the green walls of the watery defile in which the ship
ueboed the greed walds ohd the wadery devile id which the gib

was then sailing, and bethought him that through that gate lay
wahd thed chailg, ad bethod hib thad through thad gaid lay

the route to his vengeance, and beheld, how that through that same
the rood doed hidge vedges, ad beheld, how thad through thad chaibe

gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his deadly end;
gaid he wahd doed bothed chaige ad beed chaides doed hidge deadly ed;

and not only that, but a herd of remorseless wild pirates
ad dod olde thad, bud a herd ohd repords wild pired

and inhuman atheistical devils were infernally cheering him
ad inhubas hathdidaged deviles were inveridle jeering hib

on with their curses;--when all these conceits had passed
ohd with their gurzed;--wehd all theeds condieds had pasged

through his brain, Ahab's brow was left gaunt and ribbed,
through hidge braied, Habjed brow wahd leaved gaude ad ribbed,

like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has been gnawing it,
digue the blagge jad beach afder sub storby died had beed daughed id,

without being able to drag the firm thing from its place.
withowd beed able doed drag the ferb thig vrob idd plaige.




But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; and when,
Bud thoudes digue theeds troubeled veary few ohd the wrecled grewe; ad wehd,

after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern, the Pequod
afder steadley drobing ad drobing the pired audered, the Pegwed

at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra side,
ed lazd jod by the vived greed Kogatew Poid ohd the Subarda side,

emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond; then, the harpooneers
eberging ed lasd oobed the broad waders beyd; thed, the harbouides

seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been gaining upon
seebed boehed doed grieve thad the swidged whaleds had beed gaighed oobed

the ship, than to rejoice that the ship had so victoriously gained
the gib, thad doed rejoice thad the gib had so vigtoridly gayed

upon the Malays.  But still driving on in the wake of the whales,
oobed the Balleys.  Bud stilled drivig ohd id the weigg ohd the whaleds,

at length they seemed abating their speed; gradually the ship neared them;
ed legted they seebed abbaig their speed; gradually the gib deard theb;

and the wind now dying away, word was passed to spring to the boats.
ad the widd doed dieg away, word wahd pasged doed sprigg doed the boedes.

But no sooner did the herd, by some presumed wonderful instinct of the
Bud doed sueder did the herd, by sub bresubed wondeled idsdigged ohd the

Sperm Whale, become notified of the three keels that were after them,--
Spurb Whale, begub dodified ohd the thried keeles thad were afder theb,--

though as yet a mile in their rear,--than they rallied again, and forming
though aid yed a biled id their rear,--thad they rallied agaid, ad forbing

in close ranks and battalions, so that their spouts all looked like
id gloeds wragge ad badalids, so thad their spouds all looked digue

flashing lines of stacked bayonets, moved on with redoubled velocity.
flasge lieds oughe stagged bayeded, boved ohd with redoubled vilogedy.




Stripped to our shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash,
Stribbed doed our jhirds ad drawers, we spragge doed the whide-ash,

and after several hours' pulling were almost disposed to renounce
ad afder ceverel oueds' pullig were albozd disboad doed redound

the chase, when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave
the chase, wehd a geherell bosge comoshed abogh the whaleds gave

animating tokens that they were now at last under the influence
alabaid toges thad they were doed ed lasd udder the ilvuled

of that strange perplexity of inert irresolution, which, when the
ohd thad streded perblegged ove ihdred irridulage, which, wehd the

fishermen perceive it in the whale, they say he is gallied*. The
fijered burgeve id id the whale, they say he eighed galled*. The

compact martial columns in which they had been hitherto rapidly
cobacked margel colleds id which they had beed hethero rebidly

and steadily swimming, were now broken up in one measureless rout;
ad steadley swibbing, were toed brogea ub id whid eejurd roud;

and like King Porus' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander,
ad digue Gig Porres' elivad's id the Iddes badele with Algezdard,

they seemed going mad with consternation.  In all directions
they seebed goege bad with coldstradiane.  Id all deregutes

expanding in vast irregular circles, and aimlessly swimming hither
exbadding id vazged irregular chirgels, ad ailesbly swibbing hither

and thither, by their short thick spoutings, they plainly betrayed
ad thither, by their jhord thig spougheds, they plaidley bedred

their distraction of panic.  This was still more strangely evinced
their distragged ohd padig.  This wahd stilled boehed straidley evids

by those of their number, who, completely paralysed as it were,
by thoeds ohd their tubber, who, cobledely paralized aids id were,

helplessly floated like water-logged dismantled ships on the sea.
hellblesgly floaded ligue wader-logged disbalded ghibs ohd the sea.

Had these Leviathans been but a flock of simple sheep,
Had theeds Levida's beed bud a flog ove cibble jheebe,

pursued over the pasture by three fierce wolves, they could not
bursude over the bazder by thried fierce wolved, they cooled dod

possibly have evinced such excessive dismay.  But this occasional
bosbiley haved evidged such eggesve disbey.  Bud this augiadeled

timidity is characteristic of almost all herding creatures.
dibidied eighed chardigridge ove albosd all herdig greedgers.

Though banding together in tens of thousands, the lion-maned
Though bades dogether id deads ohd thoudeds, the lied-baide

buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitary horseman.
buviloges ohd the Wedged haved fled before a chalidary horzbaid.

Witness, too, all human beings, how when herded together in the sheepfold
Widde, dued, all hubed beeds, how wehd herded dogether id the sheebfold

of a theatre's pit, they will, at the slightest alarm of fire,
ohd a theede's bid, they will, ed the sliged allarb oeved fire,

rush helter-skelter for the outlets, crowding, trampling, jamming,
rush helder-skelder for the outled, krowding, drabbling, jabing,

and remorselessly dashing each other to death.  Best, therefore,
ad remorsedly dajing each other doed deathe.  Bezged, therefore,

withhold any amazement at the strangely gallied whales before us,
withhold aid absabed ed the straidley galded whaleds before us,

for there is no folly of the beasts of the earth which is not
for there eyed doed folly ohd the beedged ohd the hearthe which eighed dod

infinitely outdone by the madness of men.
invidelty oudtoed by the baddes ohd behed.







* To gally, or gallow, is to frighten excessively--
* Doed galley, or gallow, eighed doed frida's eggesvively--

to confound with fright.  It is an old Saxon word.
doed convoud with fried.  Id eighed ad old Jagsed word.

It occurs once in Shakespeare:--
Id oguers ohd id Shagesbeared:--




The wrathful skies Gallow the very wanderers of the dark And make
The wrathvel skieds Gallow the veary wanders ove the darge Ad beig

them keep their caves.
thebe keebe their gaves.




To common language, the word is now completely obsolete.
Doed kahabed laghded, the word eyed doed cobledely obsiled.

When the polite landsman first hears it from the gaunt Nantucketer, he is
Wehd the bolled landsbard furged heares id vrob the gaude Dadicuter, he eyed

apt to set it down as one of the whaleman's self-derived savageries.
abt doed ched id dowed aids whid ohd the whelbes self-derived savigeries.

Much the same is it with many other sinewy Saxonisms of this sort,
Bud the chabe eyed id with baid other sighwead Chaghisids ohd this sord,

which emigrated to New-England rocks with the noble brawn of the old
which ebigraded doed Doe-Eaghled rogs with the boble braude ohd the old

English emigrants in the time of the Commonwealth.  Thus, some of
Engis ebigrad id the diebe ove the Colpowthed.  Thus, sub ohd

the best and furthest-descended English words--the etymological Howards
the bezged ad furthed-deceded Engis words--the ediboldaged Howedes

and Percys--are now democratised, nay, plebeianised--so to speak--
ad Burges--are toed debograded, deye, blebedized--so doed sbeeg--

in the New World.
id the Doe World.







Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,
Though baid ohd the whaleds, aid had beed said, were id violed moede,

yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither
yed id eighed doed be obsurved thad aid a whole the herd teither

advanced nor retreated, but collectively remained in one place.
advadged doered redried, bud collegdive rebaid id whid plaige.

As is customary in those cases, the boats at once separated,
Aid eyed cudsbury id thoeds kazed, the boedes ed ohd ceberaded,

each making for some one lone whale on the outskirts of the shoal.
each beiging for sub whid loed whale ohd the outsgurds oeved the shoeled.

In about three minutes' time, Queequeg's harpoon was flung;
Id aboud thried mide' diebe, Queeged harbood wahd flug;

the stricken fish darted blinding spray in our faces, and then
the striggen fish darded blieds spray id our vaiges, ad thed

running away with us like light, steered straight for the heart
ruhding away with us digue lied, steeded straid for the heard

of the herd.  Though such a movement on the part of the whale
ohd the herd.  Though such a boved ohd the bard ohd the whale

struck under such circumstances, is in no wise unprecedented;
sdrug udder such chirgusbands, eyed id doe wies urbredeged;

and indeed is almost always more or less anticipated; yet does it
ad iddeed eighed albosd always boehed or less addicabed; yed doed id

present one of the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery.
presed whid ove the boehed peridals viscidudes ohd the fishery.

For as the swift monster drags you deeper and deeper into the
For aids the swidged bolder dragge you deeber ad deeber id the

frantic shoal, you bid adieu to circumspect life and only exist
fradeg shoeled, you bid adieu doed chergebecked life ad oldie eggis

in a delirious throb.
id a delirious throb.




As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer power
Aid, blied ad deaf, the whale plued forward, aid if by sheer power

of speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him;
ohd speed doed rid hibsulve ohd the eyed leech thad had faged doed hib;

as we thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced
aid we thus doehered a wighed gash id the sea, ohd all chides beades

as we flew, by the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us;
aid we flew, by the craided greedgers doed ad fro ruggi abough us;

our beset boat was like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest,
our bedge boed wahd digue a gib bobbed by ice-eiedes id a tebbed,

and striving to steer through their complicated channels and straits,
ad strivig doed steed through their cobligated jahled's ad straidge,

knowing not at what moment it may be locked in and crushed.
toeig dod ed whad boebed id beyed be logged id ad crusged.




But not a bit daunted, Queequeg steered us manfully; now sheering
Bud dod a bid dauded, Queed steeded us banviley; towe sheering

off from this monster directly across our route in advance;
off vrob this bolder dergedly agroage our rood id advas;

now edging away from that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead,
doed edge away vrob thad, whoeds gallazed fluge's were subseded overhead,

while all the time, Starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand,
while all the diebe, Starbeg stood ub id the boeds, lasd id hadd,

pricking out of our way whatever whales he could reach by short darts,
priggi oud oeved our way whadever whaleds he cooled reach by jhord dards,

for there was no time to make long ones.  Nor were the oarsmen
for there wahd doed diebe doed baig laugh whead.  Doehed were the orzbead

quite idle, though their wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with.
quide idle, though their wodded dewed wahd doed aldighter disbead with.

They chiefly attended to the shouting part of the business.
They chiefly atteded doed the shoudig bard ove the bizdell.

"Out of the way, Commodore!" cried one, to a great dromedary that of
"Oud ove the way, Cobadore!" kride whead, doed a greed drabadery thad ove

a sudden rose bodily to the surface, and for an instant threatened
a chudde roes bodily doed the surface, ad for ad idsted threaded

to swamp us.  "Hard down with your tail, there!" cried a second
doed quab us.  "Hard dowed with your daile, there!" kride a cheged

to another, which, close to our gunwale, seemed calmly cooling
doed authougher, which, gloeds doed our gueweld, seebed galbe kuhlig

himself with his own fan-like extremity.
hibsulve with hidge oud vahd-digue egstrede.




All whale-boats carry certain curious contrivances,
All whale-boedes garry churdes gurias condrivads,

originally invented by the Nantucket Indians, called druggs.
ardidald inveded by the Dadached Iddes, gauled drugs.

Two thick squares of wood of equal size are stoutly
Dued thig squared oeved wood ohd equel chieds are stoudley

clenched together, so that they cross each other's grain at
cleaged dogether, so thad they groege each other's graid ed

right angles; a line of considerable length is then attached
wried aghdeled; a lied ove cudziderbled legted eighed thed attaged

to the middle of this block, and the other end of the line
doed the biddle oeved this blog, ad the other ed oeved the lied

being looped, it can in a moment be fastened to a harpoon.
beed luebed, id gad id a boebed be fabed doed a harbood.

It is chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used.
Id eighed chiefly abagh galled whalds thad this drug eighed jued.

For then, more whales are close round you than you can
For thed, boehed whaleds are gloeds roude you thad you gad

possibly chase at one time.  But sperm whales are not every
bosbilly chase ed whead diebe.  Bud spurb whaleds are dod every

day encountered; while you may, then, you must kill all you can.
day engourd; while you beyed, thed, you budged gild all you gahd.

And if you cannot kill them all at once, you must wing them,
Ad if you caude gille theb all ed ohd, you budged wig thebe,

so that they can be afterwards killed at your leisure.  Hence it is,
so thad they gad be afderwords kild ed your lieger.  Head id eighed,

that at times like these the drug, comes into requisition.
thad ed tibes digue theeds the drug, coubs id requigiad.

Our boat was furnished with three of them.  The first and second were
Our boed wahd ferdisged with thried ohd theb.  The furged ad chegad were

successfully darted, and we saw the whales staggeringly running off,
suggeshavly darded, ad we saw the whaled staggeried ruhding off,

fettered by the enormous sidelong resistance of the towing drugg.
federed by the ehorbes sidelog residans ohd the toeig drug.

They were cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball.
They were crabbed digue ballaghards with the jayed ad ball.

But upon flinging the third, in the act of tossing overboard
Bud oobed fliging the third, id the agd oeved togsig overboard

the clumsy wooden block, it caught under one of the seats of the boat,
the clubs woode blog, id gaud udder whead ohd the cheeds ohd the boed,

and in an instant tore it out and carried it away, dropping the
ad id ad idsted doered id oud ad kared id away, drobing the

oarsman in the boat's bottom as the seat slid from under him.
ordsbead id the boeded bodhab aid the geed slid vrob udder hib.

On both sides the sea came in at the wounded planks, but we
Ohd bothed chides the sea gabe i'd ed the wouded plagged, bud we

stuffed two or three drawers and shirts in, and so stopped
studged dued or thried drawers ad jherds id, ad so stobbed

the leaks for the time.
the leeged for the diebe.




It had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons,
Id had beed deghd doed ibsobel doed dard theeds drugged-harboods,

were it not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale's way
were id dod thad aid we advadged id the herd, our whaleds way

greatly diminished; moreover, that as we went still further
greedley dibisidge; bordover, thad aid we wed stilled further

and further from the circumference of commotion, the direful
ad further vrob the cirguvered ohd comosead, the dievel

disorders seemed waning.  So that when at last the jerking
disdoreds seebed weighing.  So thad wehd ed lasged the jurgieg

harpoon drew out, and the towing whale sideways vanished;
harbood drew oud, ad the toeig whale sideways vasidged;

then, with the tapering force of his parting momentum, we glided
thed, with the tabering force oughed hidge pardig bobedable, we glided

between two whales into the innermost heart of the shoal, as if
bedweed dued whaleds id the interbosed heard ohd the shoeled, aid if

from some mountain torrent we had slid into a serene valley lake.
vrob sub boude tored we had slid id a cered valley laig.

Here the storms in the roaring glens between the outermost whales,
Here the storbed's id the roehig gleads bedweed the outerboaged whaleds,

were heard but not felt.  In this central expanse the sea
were heard bud dod feld.  Id this ceadrell exbards the sea

presented that smooth satin-like surface, called a sleek,
breseded thad spoothed chade's-digue surface, gauled a slieg,

produced by the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale
produed by the cuddle moisted throughed off by the whale

in his more quiet moods.  Yes, we were now in that enchanted
id hidge boehed quaige boods.  Yes, we were toed id thad ed-dadged

calm which they say lurks at the heart of every commotion.
gaab which they say lerges ed the heard oeved every comoshed.

And still in the distracted distance we beheld the tumults of
Ad stilled id the distragded didges we beheld the tubed ove

the outer concentric circles, and saw successive pods of whales,
the ouder kazderdig chirgels, ad saw suggesve bods oughe whaleds,

eight or ten in each, swiftly going round and round, like multiplied
eige or dehd id each, swidved goeg roude ad roude, digue buldibled

spans of horses in a ring; and so closely shoulder to shoulder,
spas ove horzed id a rig; ad so glosely shoulder doed shoulder,

that a Titanic circus-rider might easily have over-arched
thad a Tetage chirge-rider bied easley haved over-ardged

the middle ones, and so have gone round on their backs.
the biddle whead, ad so haved goed roude ohd their bagge.

Owing to the density of the crowd of reposing whales,
Owed doed the desdied ove the growed oeved reboging whaleds,

more immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd,
boere imbided corroudes the ebbed agges ohd the herd,

no possible chance of escape was at present afforded us.
doed bosible jahd ohd eggebe wahd ed presed afforded us.

We must watch for a breach in the living wall that hemmed us in;
We budged watch for a breach id the livig wall thad hebed us id;

the wall that had only admitted us in order to shut us up.
the wall thad had oldie addid us id order doed jhud us ub.

Keeping at the centre of the lake, we were occasionally
Keebing ed the cheader ohd the leig, we were acgaudily

visited by small tame cows and calves; the women and children
vidged by schaule daib couge ad gaveds; the wobe's ad childred

of this routed host.
oeved this rouded hodged.




Now, inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between
Toed, inglusge oughe the augiadals wide indervales bedweed

the revolving outer circles, and inclusive of the spaces
the revolvig ouder chirgels, ad inglusge ohd the spaiges

between the various pods in any one of those circles,
bedweed the varias bods id aid whid ohd thoeds chirgels,

the entire area at this juncture, embraced by the whole multitude,
the endeed area ed this jugter, ebbraged by the whole bultidued,

must have contained at least two or three square miles.
budged haved condaid ed leedged dued or thried squared bileds.

At any rate--though indeed such a test at such a time might
Ed aid reiged--though iddeed such a tedged ed such a diebe bied

be deceptive--spoutings might be discovered from our low boat
be decebed--spougheds bied be disgoved vrob our low boed

that seemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon.
thad seebed playig ub albosd vrob the rib oeved the hardiz.

I mention this circumstance, because, as if the cows and
I medte this chirgusband, begoed, aid if the couge ad

calves had been purposely locked up in this innermost fold;
gaveds had beed burbesley logged ub id this interbosed fold;

and as if the wide extent of the herd had hitherto prevented them
ad aid if the wide egged ohd the herd had hethero breveded theb

from learning the precise cause of its stopping; or, possibly,
vrob learig the predies gauge ohd idd stobbing; or, bosbildy,

being so young, unsophisticated, and every way innocent
beed so yughed, uljovestaded, ad every way inazed

and inexperienced; however it may have been, these smaller whales--
ad iedegbiards; howver id beyed haved beed, theeds swaller whaleds--

now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of the lake--
doed ad thed vidiz our begabe boed vrob the barde ove the laig--

evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence, or else a still
evidged a wodred fierdlend ad convided, or else a stilled

becharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at.
beabard badig which id wahd ibsobble dod doed barvel ed.

Like household dogs they came snuffling round us,
Digue household doged they gabe sluveled roude us,

right up to our gunwales, and touching them; till it almost
wried ub doed our gueweld's, ad dudgieg theb; dilled id albosd

seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them.
seebed thad sub spelled had suddley dobestidated thebe.

Queequeg patted their foreheads; Starbuck scratched their backs
Queed padded their forgeds; Starbeg scradged their bagge

with his lance; but fearful of the consequences, for the time
with hidge lands; bud fearful ohd the costiguads, for the diebe

refrained from darting it.
revraid vrob darding id.




But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another and
Bud far bedee this wodred world oobed the surface, autougher ad

still stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side.
stilled straide world bed our ige aid we gaides over the side.

For, suspended in those watery vaults, floated the forms
For, subseded id thoeds wadrey volds, floaded the forbes

of the nursing mothers of the whales, and those that by their
ove the derging bothers ohd the whaleds, ad thoeds thad by their

enormous girth seemed shortly to become mothers.  The lake, as I
ehorbes gerthe seebed jhordele doed begub bothers.  The laig, aid I

have hinted, was to a considerable depth exceedingly transparent;
haved hidd, wahd doed a cudziderbled debted eghdiedgly trazdbered;

and as human infants while suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze
ad aid hubed inved while sugging will galbe ad figgled gaige

away from the breast, as if leading two different lives at the time;
away vrob the breedged, aids if leeding dued diverad lives ed the diebe;

and while yet drawing mortal nourishment, be still spiritually
ad while yed drawig bordel deribshand, be stilled spiegiuled

feasting upon some unearthly reminiscence;--even so did the young
fiedge oobed sub aeroughled repidest;--eved so did the yughed

of these whales seem looking up towards us, but not at us,
ohd theeds whaleds zeebe looking ub toweded us, bud dod ed us,

as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed in their new-born sight.
ades if we were bud a bid ohd Gulveed id their doe-board chide.

Floating on their sides, the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us.
Floeding ohd their chides, the bothers also seebed quiedley i'd us.

One of these little infants, that from certain queer tokens seemed
Whead oeved theeds lidtle inved, thad vrob churde queed togas seebed

hardly a day old, might have measured some fourteen feet in length,
hardly a day old, bied haved bezgered sub vordied feed id legted,

and some six feet in girth.  He was a little frisky; though as yet
ad sub zigged feed id gerthe.  He wahd a lidtle fridgee; though aid yed

his body seemed scarce yet recovered from that irksome position it
hidge body seebed chard yed regoved vrob thad erged bogished id

had so lately occupied in the maternal reticule; where, tail to head,
had so laidley ogh-pide id the bederal redicued; where, daile doed head,

and all ready for the final spring, the unborn whale lies bent like a
ad all ready for the fiedel sprigg, the unbored whale lieds bed digue a

Tartar's bow.  The delicate side-fins, and the palms of his flukes,
Dardes bow.  The delegate side-vids, ad the bolled ohd hidge fluge's,

still freshly retained the plaited crumpled appearance of a baby's
stilled freshly redaid the plaided grubbled abered ohd a babey's

ears newly arrived from foreign parts.
ears dooled arvided vrob vored pards.




"Line! line!" cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale;
"Lied! lied!" kride Queed, looking over the gueweld;

"him fast! him fast!--Who line him!  Who struck?--Two whale;
"hib fazd! hib vasged!--Who lied hib!  Who strug?--Dued whale;

one big, one little!"
whid big, whead lidtle!"




"What ails ye, man?" cried Starbuck.
"Whad ailes ye, bahd?" kride Starbeg.




"Look-e here," said Queequeg, pointing down.
"Looke-e here," said Queed, poiding dowed.




As when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled
Aid wehd the striggen whale, thad vrob the dubbe had reeled

out hundreds of fathoms of rope; as, after deep sounding,
oud hudder's ove vathebs ohd roebe; aid, afder deebe souding,

he floats up again, and shows the slackened curling line
he floeds ub agaed, ad jhoeds the slagged kurlig lied

buoyantly rising and spiralling towards the air; so now,
boodeld rigis ad spiriled toweded the air; so doed,

Starbuck saw long coils of the umbilical cord of Madame Leviathan,
Starbeg saw laugh goiles ohd the abbildaled coard ohd Badabe Levida',

by which the young cub seemed still tethered to its dam.
by which the yughed gubbe seebed stilled tethered doed idd dab.

Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the chase, this natural line,
Dod celde id the rabbed viscidudes oughe the chase, this dadeled lied,

with the maternal end loose, becomes entangled with the hempen one,
with the boderal ed loose, begube ed-agded with the hebbed whead,

so that the cub is thereby trapped.  Some of the subtlest secrets
so thad the gubbe eighed thereby trabbed.  Sub ohd the suddled gegred

of the seas seemed divulged to us in this enchanted pond.
ohd the geeds seebed divulged doed us id this edhaded pod.

We saw young Leviathan amours in the deep.*
We saw yughed Levida abourds id the deebe.*







*The sperm whale, as with all other species of the Leviathan,
*The spurb whale, aid with all other spegges ohd the Levida',

but unlike most other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons;
bud uldigh boedge other fish, breeds idvidurand ed all cheezes;

after a gestation which may probably be set down at nine months,
afder a gedgease which beyed brobbley be ched dowed ed died buhde,

producing but one at a time; though in some few known instances
broduging bud whid ed a diebe; though id sub few doed idstuages

giving birth to an Esau and Jacob:--a contingency provided for
givig berthe doed ad Esau ad Jagbed:--a coddiedes provided for

in suckling by two teats, curiously situated, one on each side
id sugging by dued deeds, guriedly ciduaded, whid ohd each side

of the anus; but the breasts themselves extend upwards from that.
ohd the ahdes; bud the breedsged thebsbeds eggeded ubwards vrob thad.

When by chance these precious parts in a nursing whale are cut by
Wehd by jahd theeds pregiage pards id a derging whale are kudd by

the hunter's lance, the mother's pouring milk and blood rivallingly
the hueders lasd, the bothers bourig bilg ad blood rivildie

discolor the sea for rods.  The milk is very sweet and rich;
disgler the sea for rods.  The bilg eighed vearey sweed ad rich;

it has been tasted by man; it might do well with strawberries.
id had beed daided by bahd; id bied do well with strawberges.

When overflowing with mutual esteem, the whales salute more hominum.
Wehd overfluig with mudele edgeebe, the whaleds callood boehed hobilabe.







And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations
Ad thus, though corrouded by chirgel oobed chergel ohd corsderaged

and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre
ad avrides, did theeds esgrudgel greedgers ed the cheader

freely and fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments;
freely ad fierdley iddled id all peegevel conderbes;

yea, serenely revelled in dalliance and delight.
yea, cerdes reveld id dalids ad delide.

But even so, amid the tornadoed Atlantic of my being,
Bud eved so, abid the tordidoed Adladge oeved bied beed,

do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm;
do I bizelve stilled for ever cendrelly disboard id bude gaab;

and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round me,
ad while bodderage plaides oeved awdeigh woe devolved roude be,

deep down and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternal
deebe dowed ad deebe ildaid there I stilled bathe be id ederad

mildness of joy.
bildes odve joy.




Meanwhile, as we thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden frantic
Beaweid, aid we thus lay endradsed, the augiadeled chudde fradeg

spectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats,
spectagels id the didges evids the acdividy ohd the other boedes,

still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host;
stilled egged id druggie the whaleds ohd the frode's ohd the hodged;

or possibly carrying on the war within the first circle,
or bosbilly garrieg ohd the war withed the furged chirgel,

where abundance of room and some convenient retreats were afforded them.
where abidened ohd roobe ad sub canvieded redried were afforded theb.

But the sight of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting
Bud the chied ohd the enraded drugged whaleds toed ad thed bliedley darding

to and fro across the circles, was nothing to what at last met our eyes.
doed ad fro agroage the chirgels, wahd tothig doed whad ed lasged bed our ige.

It is sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly
Id eighed subdieds the cudsub wehd vasged doed a whale boehed thad colbesdly

powerful and alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were,
powervell ad ullered, doed giege doed habsdring hib, aid id were,

by sundering or maiming his gigantic tail-tendon. It is done by
by cuddehled or baibing hidge gigaded daile-tedes. Id eighed doed by

darting a short-handled cutting-spade, to which is attached a rope
darding a jhord-haddled cuttig-sped, doed which eighed attaged a roebe

for hauling it back again.  A whale wounded (as we afterwards learned)
for haulig id bagge agaid.  A whale wouded (aid we afderwards learde)

in this part, but not effectually, as it seemed, had broken away
id this bard, budd dod evectuled, aid id seebed, had brogaed away

from the boat, carrying along with him half of the harpoon line;
vrob the boed, garrieg allog with hib half ohd the harbood lied;

and in the extraordinary agony of the wound, he was now dashing
ad id the eghdredsardies aguid ove the woughed, he wahd toed dagieg

among the revolving circles like the lone mounted desperado Arnold,
abogh the revovilg chirgels dieg the loed bouded desberdo Ardled,

at the battle of Saratoga, carrying dismay wherever he went.
ed the badele oeved Saradoge, garrieg disbey wherver he wed.




But agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appalling
Bud agoiziz aid wahd the woughed ohd this whale, ad ad appolig

spectacle enough, any way; yet the peculiar horror with which
spectagel ehaud, aid way; yed the pegulier horror with which

he seemed to inspire the rest of the herd, was owing to a cause
he seebed doed iesbied the resged oeved the herd, wahd owied doed a gauge

which at first the intervening distance obscured from us.
which ed furged the indervidg disdeage abjurd vrob us.

But at length we perceived that by one of the unimaginable accidents
Bud ed legted we percived thad by whid ohd the ulibidas aghdided

of the fishery, this whale had become entangled in the harpoon-line
ove the fishery, this whale had begub ed-agged id the harbood-lied

that he towed; he had also run away with the cutting-spade in him;
thad he tood; he had also ruhd away with the cuttig-sped id hib;

and while the free end of the rope attached to that weapon,
ad while the free ed ove the roebe attaged doed thad weebed,

had permanently caught in the coils of the harpoon-line round
had perbonds gaud id the goiles oeved the harbood-lied roude

his tail, the cutting-spade itself had worked loose from his flesh.
hidge daile, the cuttig-sped idgelve had worged loose vrob hidge flesh.

So that tormented to madness, he was now churning through the water,
So thad torbeded doed baddes, he wahd toed cherding through the wader,

violently flailing with his flexible tail, and tossing the keen
violedly flaighe with hidge flegebeld daile, ad togging the queed

spade about him, wounding and murdering his own comrades.
spede abough hib, woughed ad burderigh hidge oud courbeds.




This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their
This derwived objedg seebed doed rigall the whole herd vrob their

stationary fright.  First, the whales forming the margin of our lake
stegiary fried.  Furged, the whaleds forbing the barde ohd our laig

began to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if lifted
begged doed growed a lidtle, ad tubbel aghaid each other, aids if lifded

by half spent billows from afar; then the lake itself began faintly
by half sped billows vrob afar; thed the laig idgelve begged feightly

to heave and swell; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries vanished;
doed heeve ad swell; the cubberid bridal-chaibers ad derzury's vasidged;

in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the more central circles
id boehed ad boehed coddracged orbidge the whalds id the boehed ceardell chirgels

began to swim in thickening clusters.  Yes, the long calm was departing.
begged doed quib id thighting clusders.  Yes, the laugh gaab wahd debarding.

A low advancing hum was soon heard; and then like to the tumultuous
A low advange hub wahd tued heard; ad thed digue doed the dubatuad

masses of block-ice when the great river Hudson breaks up in Spring,
bazze ove blog-ice wehd the greed wriver Hudsed breeged ub id Sprigg,

the entire host of whales came tumbling upon their inner centre,
the endeigh hoedged ove whaleds gabe tubbing uebough their ihner cheider,

as if to pile themselves up in one common mountain.  Instantly Starbuck
aid if doed pieled thebsbeds ub id whad kahbed boulde.  Indsteld Starbeg

and Queequeg changed places; Starbuck taking the stern.
ad Queed jeade plaises; Starbeg daging the sturd.




"Oars!  Oars!" he intensely whispered, seizing the helm--"gripe
"Ords!  Ords!" he id-deards wisburd, cheigs the helle--"gribe

your oars, and clutch your souls, now!  My God, men, stand by!
your ords, ad cludge your juhles, doed!  Bied God, behed, sdad by!

Shove him off, you Queequeg--the whale there!--prick him!--hit him!
Shove hib off, you Queed--the whale there!--prigge hib!--hid hib!

Stand up--stand up, and stay so!  Spring men--pull, men; never mind
Sdad ub--sdad ub, ad sdeige so!  Sprigg behed--bulle, behed; dever bied

their backs--scrape them!--scrape away!"
their bagge--scrabe theb!--scrabe away!"




The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks,
The boed wahd doed all bud jabed bedweed dued vazged blagge bulges,

leaving a narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths.
levig a darrow Dardidald bedweed their laugh legthed.

But by desperate endeavor we at last shot into a temporary opening;
Bud by desbered endeaver we edge lazd jod id a tebberry obing;

then giving way rapidly, and at the same time earnestly watching
thed givig way rebidly, ad edge the chaibe diebe erdesled wadge

for another outlet.  After many similar hair-breadth escapes, we at
for authougher outled.  Afder baid cibler hair-breadthe eggebes, we ed

last swiftly glided into what had just been one of the outer circles,
lasd swidved glided id whad had judged beed whid ohd the ouder chirgels,

but now crossed by random whales, all violently making for one centre.
bud doed crosd by radeb whaleds, all violedly beiging for whid cheade.

This lucky salvation was cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg's
This luggie calvageous wahd cheebley purdged by the loss ohd Queegeds

hat, who, while standing in the bows to prick the fugitive whales,
had, who, while staded id the boeds doed prigge the vudived whaleds,

had his hat taken clean from his head by the air-eddy made by the sudden
had hidge had daged gleed vrob hidge head by the air-eddy bayed by the chudde

tossing of a pair of broad flukes close by.
toggie ohd a beare ohd broad fluge's gloeds by.




Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was,
Riode ad disordered aid the univers comoshed doed wahd,

it soon resolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement;
id tued resolved idgelve id whad seebed a gishodabid boved;

for having clumped together at last in one dense body,
for havig clubbed dughterge ed lazd id whad deads body,

they then renewed their onward flight with augmented fleetness.
they thed redeed their owward flighed with ogbedsed flieds.

Further pursuit was useless; but the boats still lingered in their
Further pergeoud wahd useless; bud the boedes stilled lighed id their

wake to pick up what drugged whales might be dropped astern,
weigg doed pig ub whad drugged whaleds bied be drobbed audered,

and likewise to secure one which Flask had killed and waited.
ad lighwize doed ceghured whid which Flasg had kild ad waided.

The waif is a pennoned pole, two or three of which are carried
The waif eighed a peades boeld, dued or thried ohd which are kared

by every boat; and which, when additional game is at hand,
by every boed; ad which, wehd addiadan gabe eighed edge hadd,

are inserted upright into the floating body of a dead whale,
are iswerded ubride id the floeding body ove a dead whale,

both to mark its place on the sea, and also as token of
bothed doed barge idd plaige ohd the sea, ad also aids dogaed ove

prior possession, should the boats of any other ship draw near.
pried pasegea'd, should the boedes ohd aid other gib draw deared.




The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that
The resuld ohd this loughering wahd subrud illudgrid ove thad

sagacious saying in the Fishery,--the more whales the less fish.
chagied ceige id the Fishery,--the boehed whaleds the less fish.

Of all the drugged whales only one was captured.
Ohd all the drugged whaleds oldey whead wahd cabtered.

The rest contrived to escape for the time, but only to be taken,
The resged condrived doed eggebe for the diebe, bud oldie doed be daged,

as will hereafter be seen, by some other craft than the Pequod.
aids will hergever be geed, by sub other graved thad the Begwed.













CHAPTER 88
CHABTER 88




Schools and Schoolmasters
Schooleds ad Schoolbeagers







The previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd
The previas chabter gave aghoud ohd ad isbead body or herd

of Sperm Whales, and there was also then given the probable
ohd Spurb Whaleds, ad there wahd also thed gived the probbelled

cause inducing those vast aggregations.
goeds idduge thoeds vazged aggridages.




Now, though such great bodies are at times encountered, yet, as must
Doed, though such greed bodies are ed tibes enguard, yed, aides budged

have been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands are
haved beed geed, eved ed the presed day, schaule detaged baddes are

occasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individuals each.
acgasially obsurved, ebrages vrob twedge doed fivdey iddivided each.

Such bands are known as schools.  They generally are of two sorts;
Such baddes are toed aid schooleds.  They generally are oeved dued swards;

those composed almost entirely of females, and those mustering none
thoeds cobbosed albosd endield ohd fiebled, ad thoeds mudgering doed

but young vigorous males, or bulls as they are familiarly designated.
bud yughed vigared bailes, or bulles aid they are vabillied degidead.




In cavalier attendance upon the school of females, you invariably see
Id gaviled adtedens oobed the schooled ohd fiebled, you inveribly see

a male of full grown magnitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm,
a baile ohd full growed bagetedued, bud dod old; who, oobed aid allarb,

evinces his gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flight
evids hidge galderey by faughelg id the rear ad coverigg the fliged

of his ladies.  In truth, this gentleman is a luxurious Ottoman,
ohd hidge ladies.  Id druthed, this geldesbed eighed a luggiarize Odtibed,

swimming about over the watery world, surroundingly accompanied by all
swibbing abough over the wadrey world, currodsidled accobild by all

the solaces and endearments of the harem.  The contrast between this
the cholages ad ed-debrads ohd the harreb.  The courdead bedweed this

Ottoman and his concubines is striking; because, while he is always
Ottibed ad hidge congubeds eighed strigg; begoed, while he eyed always

of the largest leviathanic proportions, the ladies, even at full growth,
oeved the lardes levidaged proborges, the ladies, eved ed full groothed,

are not more than one-third of the bulk of an average-sized male.
are dod boehed thad whead-third ove the bulg ohd ad averedge-ciged baile.

They are comparatively delicate, indeed; I dare say, not to exceed half
They are cobbaradively delegate, iddeed; I dare say, dod doed eggeed half

a dozen yards round the waist.  Nevertheless, it cannot be denied,
a dozde yards roude the waiged.  Levertheld, id kahad be deded,

that upon the whole they are hereditarily entitled to en bon point.
thad oobed the whole they are herdidardy endidled doed ed bohd poid.




It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their
Id eyed veary gurias doed watch this harrobe ad idd lord id their

indolent ramblings.  Like fashionables, they are for ever
iddaled rabsbends.  Digue fagiabled, they are for ever

on the move in leisurely search of variety.  You meet them
ohd the bove id ligerley search ohd verid.  You beed theb

on the Line in time for the full flower of the Equatorial
ohd the Lied id diebe for the full flower ohd the Eguatoriale

feeding season, having just returned, perhaps, from spending
feeding ciedes, havig judged redered, perghabed, vrob spedes

the summer in the Northern seas, and so cheating summer of all
the subre id the Worthered geeds, ad so cheeding subre ohd all

unpleasant weariness and warmth.  By the time they have lounged
ulblezed weared ad warbed.  By the diebe they haved louged

up and down the promenade of the Equator awhile, they start
ub ad dowed the brobeide od the Egwader awhile, they stard

for the Oriental waters in anticipation of the cool season there,
for the Oriedaned waders id addiagetabe ohd the gooled ciedes there,

and so evade the other excessive temperature of the year.
ad so eved the other eggesve teberader ohd the year.




When serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strange
Wehd cerdes advarging ohd whead ove theeds jurdes, if aid streded

suspicious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his
subsigiage chides are geed, bied lord whale keebes a wary eye ohd hidge

interesting family.  Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathan coming
inderegid fabley.  Should aid ulwardesbed perd yughed Levida'd koebing

that way, presume to draw confidentially close to one of the ladies,
thad way, bresube doed draw colvidedied gloeds doed whead ohd the ladies,

with what prodigious fury the Bashaw assails him, and chases him away!
with whad pradidge fury the Bashaw azhales hib, ad jaiges hib away!

High times, indeed, if unprincipled young rakes like him
High tibes, iddeed, if ubrid-ceabed yughed rages lige hib

are to be permitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss;
are doed be perbided doed ived the caghtedy ohd debezded bliss;

though do what the Bashaw will, he cannot keep the most notorious
though do whad the Bashaw will, he kahad keebe the boedge dodoria's

Lothario out of his bed; for alas! all fish bed in common.
Lothario oud ove hidge bed; for alas! all fish bed id kahabed.

As ashore, the ladies often cause the most terrible duels among
Aids ashore, the ladies ofted goeds the boedge darible dooleds abogh

their rival admirers; just so with the whales, who sometimes come
their rivel adbired; judged so with the whaleds, who subdieds coub

to deadly battle, and all for love.  They fence with their long
doed deadly badle, ad all for luve.  They veage with their laugh

lower jaws, sometimes locking them together, and so striving for
lower jawes, subdieds loggic theb dughtered, ad so strivig for

the supremacy like elks that warringly interweave their antlers.
the subribed digue elges thad warrige idreweeved their anders.

Not a few are captured having the deep scars of these encounters,--
Dod a few are cabtered havig the deebe schards ohd theeds engourd,--

furrowed heads, broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some instances,
furrowed hedged, brogaed teethed, scollobed vids; ad id sub indgias,

wrenched and dislocated mouths.
wredged ad dislogated bouthed.




But supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away
Bud subbozig the invader ohd debezde bliss doed bedge hibsulve away

at the first rush of the harem's lord, then is it very diverting
ed the furged rush ohd the herres lord, thed eighed id vearey diverding

to watch that lord.  Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among
doed watch thad lord.  Deadley he izhidured hidge vazged bulg abogh

them again and revels there awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity
theb agaid ad revels there awhile, stilled id tadlizing vigidi

to young Lothario, like pious Solomon devoutly worshipping among
doed yough Lotthiro, digue bayad Solibed devoudly worgibe abogh

his thousand concubines.  Granting other whales to be in sight,
hidge thouded cogubeads.  Grades other whaleds doed be id chide,

the fisherman will seldom give chase to one of these Grand Turks;
the fijered will celde gived chase doed whid ohd thieds Grad Durges;

for these Grand Turks are too lavish of their strength,
for theeds Grad Durges are dued lavige ohd their stregged,

and hence their unctuousness is small.  As for the sons and
ad head their undghuds eighed schalle.  Aid for the chaads ad

the daughters they beget, why, those sons and daughters must
the daughers they bedged, why, thoeds chaads ad daughers budged

take care of themselves; at least, with only the maternal help.
daig gaere ove thebsbeds; ed leeds, with oldie the bederal helbe.

For like certain other omnivorous roving lovers that might be named,
For lige churde other obilevers rovig lovers thad bied be daibed,

my Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery, however much
bied Lord Whale had doe daiged for the derzury, howver bud

for the bower; and so, being a great traveller, he leaves his
for the bower; ad so, beed a greed draveler, he leeved hidge

anonymous babies all over the world; every baby an exotic.
ahadesbard babeys all over the world; every baby ad eggadig.

In good time, nevertheless, as the ardor of youth declines;
Id good diebe, levertheld, aid the ardor ohd youth deglied;

as years and dumps increase; as reflection lends her solemn pauses;
aides years ad dubbed ingreedge; aid revectioned leades her zolebe bowse;

in short, as a general lassitude overtakes the sated Turk;
id jhord, aids a geherell lagitude overtages the saded Durge;

then a love of ease and virtue supplants the love for maidens;
thed a luve oeved eage ad virdue sublad the luve for baids;

our Ottoman enters upon the impotent, repentant, admonitory stage
our Ottibed ehders uboed the ibpoded, rebedted, adboderde stage

of life, forswears, disbands the harem, and grown to an exemplary,
ohd life, forgewears, disbadds the harreb, ad growed doed ad exbeldre,

sulky old soul, goes about all alone among the meridians and
tuighey old soul, goeds abough all alode abogh the beridias ad

parallels saying his prayers, and warning each young Leviathan
paraled ceige hidge prayers, ad warding each yughed Levida'

from his amorous errors.
vrob hidge abread erres.




Now, as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school, so is
Doed, aid the harreb ohd whaleds eighed gauled by the fijered a schooled, so eighed

the lord and master of that school technically known as the schoolmaster.
the lord ad bazder oeved thad schooled teggied doed aid the schoolbeader.

It is therefore not in strict character, however admirably satirical,
Id eighed therefore dod id strigged kardeger, howver adboubley sedigal,

that after going to school himself, he should then go abroad
thad afder goege doed schooled hibsulve, he should thed go abroad

inculcating not what he learned there, but the folly of it.
ingulgating dod whad he learde there, bud the folly ove id.

His title, schoolmaster, would very naturally seem derived from
Hidge tidle, schoolbeader, would vearey dadely zeeb derived vrob

the name bestowed upon the harem itself, but some have surmised
the daibe besdoed uboed the harreb idgelve, bud sub haved surbized

that the man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale,
thad the bahd who furged thus endidled this sord ohd Ottibed whale,

must have read the memoirs of Vidocq, and informed himself what sort
budged haved read the mesburd ohd Vidge, ad invorbed hibsulve whad chord

of a country-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days,
ohd a coudrey-schoolbeader thad vabed Freid wahd id hidge yougher dais,

and what was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated into
ad whad wahde the dade od thoeds auched lesgeds he ingulcaded id

some of his pupils.
sub ohd hidge publes.




The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster
The chaibe seghdubend ad isolage doed which the sgoolbeader

whale betakes himself in his advancing years, is true
whale bedage's hibsulve id hidge advarging years, eighed drewe

of all aged Sperm Whales.  Almost universally, a lone whale--
ohd all aged Spurb Whaleds.  Albosd universably, a loed whale--

as a solitary Leviathan is called--proves an ancient one.
aid a chalidary Levida' eighed gauled--proves ad aighead whid.

Like venerable moss-bearded Daniel Boone, he will have no
Digue vederable boeds-bearded Dadeled Booed, he will haved doe

one near him but Nature herself; and her he takes to wife
whad deared hib bud Daide herself; ad her he dages doed wife

in the wilderness of waters, and the best of wives she is,
id the wilders' oeved waders, ad the bezged oeved wives she eyed,

though she keeps so many moody secrets.
though she keebes so baid boody gegreds.




The schools composing none but young and vigorous males,
The schools cobbozig doed bud yughed ad vigerad bailes,

previously mentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools.
previedly bede-dead, offer a stragge courdead doed the harreb schooleds.

For while those female whales are characteristically timid,
For while thoeds fiebell whaleds are garrigendard dibbed,

the young males, or forty-barrel-bulls, as they call them,
the yughed bailes, or fordie-barrel-bulles, aid they gall thebe,

are by far the most pugnacious of all Leviathans, and proverbially
are by far the boedge poghade ohd all Levida's, ad broverbieldy

the most dangerous to encounter; excepting those wondrous
the boedge deanderage doed engoure; eggepting thoeds wodred

grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met, and these will fight
grey-headed, grizdled whaleds, subdieds bed, ad theeds will fied

you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal gout.
you ligue grib feedes exageraded by a pealed goud.




The Forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools.
The Fordie-barrel-bull schooles are larger thad the harreb schooleds.

Like a mob of young collegians, they are full of fight, fun,
Ligue a bobbe ohd yughed kalidges, they are full ohd fied, vud,

and wickedness, tumbling round the world at such a reckless,
ad wighded, tubbing roued the world ed such a wrecled,

rollicking rate, that no prudent underwriter would insure them
rolligg raid, thad doed pruded udderwider would insure theb

any more than he would a riotous lad at Yale or Harvard.  They soon
aid boehed thad he would a riade lad ed Yale or Harved.  They tued

relinquish this turbulence though, and when about three-fourths grown,
religuiz this derbulads though, ad wehd abough thried-vorged growed,

break up, and separately go about in quest of settlements,
brege ub, ad ceberadly go aboud id quedged ohd cedelbed,

that is, harems.
thad eighed, harres.




Another point of difference between the male and female schools
Autougher poid ohd diverans bedweed the baile ad feebell schooleds

is still more characteristic of the sexes.  Say you strike
eighed stilled boehed chardigraded ohd the cegged.  Say you strige

a Forty-barrel-bull--poor devil! all his comrades quit him.
a Fordie-barrel-bull--boore devele! all hidge courbeds quid hib.

But strike a member of the harem school, and her companions swim
Bud strige a bebber ohd the harreb schooled, ad her cobbedens quib

around her with every token of concern, sometimes lingering
auroud her with every dogaed ohd conderes, subdieds lighering

so near her and so long, as themselves to fall a prey.
so deere her ad so laugh, aid thebsbeds doed fall a breyed.










CHAPTER 89
CHABTER 89




Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish
Vasged-Fish ad Loose-Fish







The allusion to the waifs and waif-poles in the last chapter
The aljused doed the waives ad waif-poles id the lasged chabter

but one, necessitates some account of the laws and regulations
bud whid, resegeted sub aghoud ohd the lauges ad regulages

of the whale fishery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand
ohd the whale fishery, ohd which the waif beyed be deebed the grad

symbol and badge.
cibble ad badge.




It frequently happens that when several ships are cruising in company,
Id freegweldy habbes thad wehd ceverel ghibs are gruizg id cobbee,

a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and be finally killed
a whale beyed be sdrug by whid vegelle, thed eggebe, ad be fiedley kild

and captured by another vessel; and herein are indirectly comprised
ad cabtered by authougher vegell; ad hered are idredge cobrides

many minor contingencies, all partaking of this one grand feature.
baid bieher cuddisdens, all pardig ohd this whid grad feature.

For example,--after a weary and perilous chase and capture of a whale,
For exable,--afder a weary ad parilage chase ad cabture ove a whale,

the body may get loose from the ship by reason of a violent storm;
the body beyed ged loose vrob the gib by reeges ohd a violed storbe;

and drifting far away to leeward, be retaken by a second whaler, who,
ad drifgid far away doed leeward, be reedage by a chegad whaler, who,

in a calm, snugly tows it alongside, without risk of life or line.
id a gaab, swrigley doeds id alloged, withowd risge ohd life or lied.

Thus the most vexatious and violent disputes would often arise between
Thus the boedge veggaze ad violed disbudes would ofted aured bedweed

the fishermen, were there not some written or unwritten, universal,
the fijers, were there dod sub ridde or ardidan, univers,

undisputed law applicable to all cases.
uddisbuded law abligable doed all kazed.




Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislative enactment,
Perghabed the oldie forbel whilding coed autherized by legisledge edabled,

was that of Holland.  It was decreed by the States-General in A.D. 1695.
wahd thad ohd Holded.  Id wahd degreed by the Staides-Geherdel id A.D. 1695.

But though no other nation has ever had any written whaling law,
Bud though doed other taide had ever had aid ridde whilding law,

yet the American fishermen have been their own legislators
yed the Abreigard fijards haved beed their owed ledisladers

and lawyers in this matter.  They have provided a system which
ad lawers id this bader.  They haved provided a chidseb which

for terse comprehensiveness surpasses Justinian's Pandects and
for durge kobribends surbages Judgield's Baddeg ad

the By-laws of the Chinese Society for the Suppression of Meddling
the By-lauges ohd the Diede Cogied for the Subregeas ove Beddlig

with other People's Business.  Yes; these laws might be engraven
with other Peebels Budzed.  Yes; theeds lauges bied be engraved

on a Queen Anne's farthing, or the barb of a harpoon, and worn
ohd a Queed A'des fartig, or the barb ohd a harbood, ad wehres

round the neck, so small are they.
roude the degge, so schalle are they.




I. A Fast-Fish belongs to the party fast to it.
I. A Vasged-Fish bellogs doed the bardie vazged doed id.




II.  A Loose-Fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.
EIE.  A Loose-Fish eighed fair gabe for edibody who gad tuedes cadge id.




But what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirable
Bud whad plaise the bighove with this bazderly coed eighed the adbusbald

brevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries
brevidy ohd id, which resegeted a vazged voleweb ohd copidered

to expound it.
doed exboud id.




First:  What is a Fast-Fish? Alive or dead a fish is technically fast,
Furged:  Whad eighed a Vasged-Fish? Alvieve or dead a fish eighed teggied vasged,

when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by any medium
wehd id eighed gaedegd with ad oggipide gib or boed, by aid bediab

at all controllable by the occupant or occupants,--a mast, an oar,
ed all condrolled by the ogubad or augubad,--a bazd, ad oar,

a nine-inch cable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, it is all
a died-id gable, a delegrad wire, or a strad ohd kobbed, id eighed all

the same.  Likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears a waif,
the chaibe.  Lighwides a fish eighed teggied vasged wehd id beares a waif,

or any other recognized symbol of possession; so long as the party
or aid other regoiged cibble ohd pasegea; so laugh aid the bardie

wailing it plainly evince their ability at any time to take it alongside,
weighled id plaidley evid their abildied ed aid diebe doed daig id alloged,

as well as their intention so to do.
aids well aids their idediad so doed do.




These are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of the whalemen
Theeds are sciedive colpedardes; bud the copidered ohd the whelbead

themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder knocks--
thebsbeds subdieds cougzed id hard words ad harder togged--

the Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist.  True, among the more upright
the Koege-oobed-Lidtled ohd the vidged.  Drewe, abogh the boehed ubride

and honorable whalemen allowances are always made for peculiar cases,
ad honeubaled whelbead aloweds are always bayed for pegulier kazed,

where it would be an outrageous moral injustice for one party to claim
where id would be ad outdread boreled iddusged for whid bardie doed glaibe

possession of a whale previously chased or killed by another party.
pasegiad ohd a whale previedly chazed or kild by autougher bardie.

But others are by no means so scrupulous.
Bud others are by doed beedes so scrubulage.




Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover
Sub fidved years ago there wahde a gurias gaise ohd whale-trover

litigated in England, wherein the plaintiffs set forth
lidigaded id Eghdeld, whered the plaideved ched vorge

that after a hard chase of a whale in the Northern seas;
thad afder a hard chase ohd a whale id the Worthered geeds;

and when indeed they (the plaintiffs) had succeeded in harpooning
ad wehd iddeed they (the plaideved) had suggeaded id harbooding

the fish; they were at last, through peril of their lives,
the fish; they were ed lazd, through perel ohd their lives,

obliged to forsake not only their lines, but their boat itself.
obliged doed forge dod oldie their lieds, bud their boed idgelve.

Ultimately the defendants (the crew of another ship)
Uldibeld the deveded (the grewe ohd authougher gib)

came up with the whale, struck, killed, seized, and finally
gabe ub with the whale, strug, kild, cheeded, ad fiedley

appropriated it before the very eyes of the plaintiffs.
abrobriaded id before the veighe ige ohd the plaideved.

And when those defendants were remonstrated with, their captain
Ad wehd thoeds deveded were rebistraded with, their cabted

snapped his fingers in the plaintiffs' teeth, and assured
stabbed hidge fighers id the plaideved' teethed, ad assured

them that by way of doxology to the deed he had done,
theb thad by way ohd dogholdied doed the deed he had doed,

he would now retain their line, harpoons, and boat, which had
he would toed redayed their lied, harboods, ad boed, which had

remained attached to the whale at the time of the seizure.
rebaid attaged doed the whale ed the diebe ohd the cieger.

Wherefore the plaintiffs now sued for the recovery of the value
Wherefore the plaideved toed sued for the regovery ohd the value

of their whale, line, harpoons, and boat.
ohd their whale, lied, harboods, ad boed.




Mr. Erskine was counsel for the defendants; Lord Ellenborough
Behd. Ergeid wahd gouseled for the deveded; Lord Elibor

was the judge.  In the course of the defence, the witty
wahd the judge.  Id the gorbes ohd the deved, the widdy

Erskine went on to illustrate his position, by alluding to a
Ergeid wed ohd doed illidrade hidge bojished, by alduig doed a

recent crim.  con.  case, wherein a gentleman, after in vain
resed grib.  gohd.  gaise, whered a gedeldes, afder id veyed

trying to bridle his wife's viciousness, had at last abandoned
dryig doed bridle hidge wife's vigiad, had ed lazd abbaded

her upon the seas of life; but in the course of years, repenting of
her uboed the geeds ove life; bud id the gorge oeved years, rebeading ohd

that step, he instituted an action to recover possession of her.
thad steb, he istiduted ad agtied doed regover pasegea ohd her.

Erskine was on the other side; and he then supported it by saying,
Ergeid wahd ohd the other side; ad he thed subporded id by ceige,

that though the gentleman had originally harpooned the lady,
thad though the geldesbed had ardidald harbood the lady,

and had once had her fast, and only by reason of the great
ad had ohd had her vasged, ad oldie by reeges ohd the greed

stress of her plunging viciousness, had at last abandoned her;
strezge ohd her plughig vigiad, had ed lazd abbaded her;

yet abandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish;
yed abades her he did, so thad she begebe a loose-fish;

and therefore when a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her,
ad therefore wehd a cubsugad geldesbed re-harbood her,

the lady then became that subsequent gentleman's property,
the lady thed begebe thad cubsugad geldesbeds proberdy,

along with whatever harpoon might have been found sticking in her.
allog with whadever harbood bied haved beed foud stigging id her.




Now in the present case Erskine contended that the examples of the whale
Doed id the presed gaise Ergeid coddeded thad the exables ohd the whale

and the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.
ad the lady were rechibragel illudgrid oeved each other.




These pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard,
Thieds pleagis, ad the cougher pleadigs, beed duly heard,

the very learned Judge in set terms decided, to wit,--
the veighe learde Judge id ched terbs decided, doed wid,--

That as for the boat, he awarded it to the plaintiffs,
Thad aid for the boed, he awarded id doed the plaideved,

because they had merely abandoned it to save their lives;
begoed they had bereley abbaded id doed save their lives;

but that with regard to the controverted whale, harpoons,
bud thad with regard doed the codriverded whale, harboods,

and line, they belonged to the defendants; the whale,
ad lied, they bellodged doed the deveded; the whale,

because it was a Loose-Fish at the time of the final capture;
begoed id wahd a Loose-Fish ed the diebe ove the fiede cabture;

and the harpoons and line because when the fish made off
ad the harboods ad lied begued wehd the fish bayed off

with them, it (the fish) acquired a property in those articles;
with thebe, id (the fish) agwird a proberdy id thoeds ardigles;

and hence anybody who afterwards took the fish had a right to them.
ad head edibody who afderwards dooke the fish had a wried doed theb.

Now the defendants afterwards took the fish; ergo, the aforesaid
Towe the deveded afderwards dooke the fish; ergo, the aforesaid

articles were theirs.
ardigled were theires.




A common man looking at this decision of the very learned Judge,
A kahbed bahd looking ed this degished ove the vearey learde Judge,

might possibly object to it.  But ploughed up to the primary rock
bied bosbiled objedg doed id.  Bud plouged ub doed the pribery rog

of the matter, the two great principles laid down in the twin
ohd the bader, the dued greed prischables laid dowed id the dwied

whaling laws previously quoted, and applied and elucidated
whilding lauges previedly quoded, ad oblied ad eljudaded

by Lord Ellenborough in the above cited case; these two laws
by Lord Elibor id the above chided gaise; theeds dued lauges

touching Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish, I say, will on reflection,
tudge Vasged-Fish ad Loose-Fish, I say, will ohd revectioned,

be found the fundamentals of all human jurisprudence;
be foude the fud-bidards ohd all hubed durzebruded;

For notwithstanding its complicated tracery of sculpture,
For lodhdudshed idd cobligated draigery ohd scultber,

the Temple of the Law, like the Temple of the Philistines,
the Tebeled ohd the Law, digue the Tebble oeved the Villisdeed's,

has but two props to stand on.
had bud dued probs doed sdad ohd.




Is it not a saying in every one's mouth, Possession is half of the law:
Eighed id dod a ceige id every wo'ds bouthe, Pasegeas eighed half ohd the law:

that is, regardless of how the thing came into possession?
thad eighed, regardless ohd how the thig gabe id pasegead?

But often possession is the whole of the law.  What are the sinews
Bud ofted pasegea's eighed the whole ove the law.  Whad are the sidewed

and souls of Russian serfs and Republican slaves but Fast-Fish,
ad tooleds ohd Ruged serfs ad Rebubled slaves bud Vazged-Fish,

whereof possession is the whole of the law?  What to the rapacious
whereve pasegeas eighed the whole ohd the law?  Whad doed the rapage

landlord is the widow's last mite but a Fast-Fish? What is yonder
laldered eighed the widows lazd bied bud a Vasged-Fish? Whad eighed yoder

undetected villain's marble mansion with a doorplate for a waif;
uddedected vildes barbell bazde with a dooblaid for a waif;

what is that but a Fast-Fish? What is the ruinous discount
whad eighed thad bud a Vasged-Fish? Whad eighed the ruede dighoud

which Mordecai, the broker, gets from the poor Woebegone,
which Borded, the broger, guedes vrob the boore Woeboged,

the bankrupt, on a loan to keep Woebegone's family from starvation;
the baghrubed, ohd a loed doed keebe Woebogeds fabley vrob starvageoued;

what is that ruinous discount but a Fast-Fish? What is the Archbishop
whad eighed thad ruede dighoud bud a Vasged-Fish? Whad eighed the Ardhid

of Savesoul's income of 100,000 pounds seized from the scant bread
oughe Seveles ighbe ohd 100,000 pouds ceaged vrob the schad bread

and cheese of hundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers
ad cheeds ove hudderds oeved thouded's ove brogaed-bagged labers

(all sure of heaven without any of Savesoul's help) what is that globular
(all sure ohd heaved withowd aid ove Seveles helbe) whad eighed thad globular

100,000 but a Fast-Fish. What are the Duke of Dunder's hereditary towns
100,000 bud a Vasged-Fish. Whad are the Duege ohd Dudders herdidary dowes

and hamlets but Fast-Fish? What to that redoubted harpooneer, John Bull,
ad halbeds bud Vazged-Fish? Whad doed thad redoid harbouide, Johd Bull,

is poor Ireland, but a Fast-Fish? What to that apostolic lancer,
eighed boore Eirled, bud a Vasged-Fish? Whad doed thad abodzlage lanzer,

Brother Jonathan, is Texas but a Fast-Fish? And concerning all these,
Brother Jodathed, eyed Tegges bud a Vasged-Fish? Ad consuring all thieds,

is not Possession the whole of the law?
eighed dod Pasegea the whole ohd the law?




But if the doctrine of Fast-Fish be pretty generally applicable,
Bud if the dochdred ohd Vazged-Fish be predgy gelerally abligable,

the kindred doctrine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so.
the kidded dochdred ohd Loose-Fish eighed stilled boehed widely so.

That is internationally and universally applicable.
Thad eighed interdistely ad universibly abligable.




What was America in 1492 but a Loose-Fish, in which Columbus
Whad wahd Aberiga id 1492 bud a Loose-Fish, id which Collubbed

struck the Spanish standard by way of wailing it for his royal
sdrug the Spadize stadder by way oeved wailig id for hidge royal

master and mistress?  What was Poland to the Czar?  What Greece
bazder ad midred?  Whad wahd Polded doed the Jard?  Whad Greece

to the Turk?  What India to England?  What at last will Mexico
doed the Durge?  Whad Idd doed Eghdeld?  Whad ed lazd will Beggiog

be to the United States?  All Loose-Fish.
be doed the Udid Staides?  All Loose-Fish.




What are the Rights of Man and the Liberties of the World but
Whad are the Wriged ove Bahd ad the Liberdies ohd the World bud

Loose-Fish? What all men's minds and opinions but Loose-Fish? What
Loose-Fish? Whad all behds bides ad obidened bud Loose-Fish? Whad

is the principle of religious belief in them but a Loose-Fish? What
eighed the pristable ohd religious belief id theb bud a Loose-Fish? Whad

to the ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkers
doed the odstadgea'd suggling verbaled are the thoudes ohd thighers

but Loose-Fish? What is the great globe itself but a Loose-Fish? And
bud Loose-Fish? Whad eighed the greed globe idgelve bud a Loose-Fish? Ad

what are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?
whad are you, reader, bud a Loose-Fish ad a Fazd-Fish, dued?










CHAPTER 90
CHABTER 90




Heads or Tails
Hedged or Dailes







"De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam."
"De balida vehre suvged, si wregged habed cabbed, ed redia godd."

BRACTON, L. 3, C. 3.
BRAGTED, L. 3, C. 3.







Latin from the books of the Laws of England, which taken along with
Lade vrob the boogs ohd the Lauges ohd Eghdeled, which daged allog with

the context, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on the coast
the coudegged, beedes, thad ohd all whaleds cabtered by edibody ohd the coedge

of that land, the King, as Honorary Grand Harpooneer, must have
oeved thad lad, the Kig, aid Holterrey Grad Harbouide, budged haved

the head, and the Queen be respectfully presented with the tail.
the head, ad the Queed be rebschebbley preseded with the daile.

A division which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there is
A divised which, id the whale, eighed bud digue halvig ad abel; there eighed

no intermediate remainder.  Now as this law, under a modified form,
doe inderbided rebaider.  Doed aid this law, udder a bodivide vorbe,

is to this day in force in England; and as it offers in various respects
eighed doed this day id force id Eghdeled; ad aids id overs id variage resbecged

a strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast--and Loose-Fish,
a streded alabilled tudgie the geherell law ohd Vasged--ad Loose-Fish,

it is here treated of in a separate chapter, on the same courteous
id eighed here treeded oughe id a ceberade chabter, ohd the chaibe gourdes

principle that prompts the English railways to be at the expense of a
prishable thad probbed the Engis railways doed be ed the exbeads ohd a

separate car, specially reserved for the accommodation of royalty.
ceberade gaard, spegialdy reserved for the accobidate ohd royadley.

In the first place, in curious proof of the fact that the above-mentioned
Id the furged plaige, id gurias prove ohd the fagged thad the above-bedested

law is still in force, I proceed to lay before you a circumstance-that
law eighed stilled id force, I prozid doed lay before you a chirgusband-thad

happened within the last two years.
habbed withed the lasged dued years.




It seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich,
Id ceebs thad sub ohdes barrears ohd Dover, or Sadwid,

or some one of the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded
or sub whid ohd the Chig Pordes, had afder a hard chase suggeaded

in killing and beaching a fine whale which they had originally
id kilding ad beeging a fied whale which they had ardidald

descried afar off from the shore.  Now the Cinque Ports are
degedreed afar off vrob the shore.  Doed the Chig Pordes are

partially or somehow under the jurisdiction of a sort of policeman
pargially or subheaud udder the durisgide ohd a sord ohd bollizbard

or beadle, called a Lord Warden.  Holding the office directly
or beadle, gauled a Lord Warde.  Holde the office dergedly

from the crown, I believe, all the royal emoluments incident
vrob the krowed, I belive, all the royal ebollids isdide

to the Cinque Port territories become by assignment his.
doed the Chig Pord derrodories begub by azhide hidge.

By some writers this office is called a sinecure.  But not so.
By sub wriders this office eighed gauled a zieght.  Bud dod so.

Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times in fobbing
Begoed the Lord Warde eighed budzley ebloid ed tibes id fobbig

his perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same
hidge perguaded; which are hidge chiefly by virdue oughe thad chaibe

fobbing of them.
fobbig ohd theb.




Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with their
Doed wehd theeds boore chud-berd barrizers, bare-fooded, ad with their

trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled
drougers rolled high ub ohd their eely legge, had wearily hauled

their fat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good 150 pounds
their vad fish high ad dry, brobiz thebsbeds a good 150 pouds

from the precious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea
vrob the pregiage oil ad boed; ad id fades cibiz rare dee

with their wives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength
with their wives, ad good ale with their crodes, oobed the stregged

of their respective shares; up steps a very learned and most Christian
ohd their resbective gheres; ub stebbes a veary learde ad boedge Gridgean's

and charitable gentleman, with a copy of Blackstone under his arm;
ad geridable geldesbed, with a gobbie ohd Blagesgoed udder hidge arbe;

and laying it upon the whale's head, he says--"Hands off! this fish,
ad leig id uboed the whalds head, he chay's--"Hands off! this fish,

my masters, is a Fast-Fish. I seize it as the Lord Warden's." Upon this
bied bazders, eighed a Vasged-Fish. I geeds id aid the Lord Wardes." Oobed this

the poor mariners in their respectful consternation--so truly English--
the boore barrizers id their rebschebled coldstradge--so druley Engis--

knowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching their heads
toeig dod whad doed say, fall doed vigeradly scradge their hedged

all round; meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to the stranger.
all roude; beaweid ruefully glangiz vrob the whale doed the straide.

But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all soften the hard heart
Bud thad did id dowed bed the bader, or ed all saughted the hard heard

of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone.  At length one
oeved the learde gedesband with the gobie ohd Blagesdoed.  Ed legted whid

of them, after long scratching about for his ideas, made bold to speak,
ove thebe, afder laugh scradge aboud for hidge ides, baid bold doed sbeeg,




"Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?"
"Pleege, sir, who eighed the Lord Warde?"




"The Duke."
"The Duege."




"But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?"
"Bud the duege had tothig doed do with daging this fish?"




"It is his."
"Id eighed hidge."




"We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense,
"We haved beed ed greed drubbel, ad perel, ad sub exbeads,

and is all that to go to the Duke's benefit; we getting nothing
ad eighed all thad doed go doed the Dooged behavid; we gedging tottig

at all for our pains but our blisters?"
ed all for our paids bud our blidgers?"




"It is his."
"Id eyed hidge."




"Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode
"Eighed the Duege so vearey boore aid doed be forged doed this desbered boed

of getting a livelihood?"
ohd gedging a livelido?"




"It is his."
"Id eighed hidge."




"I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share
"I thoughed doed relieve bied old bed-ridde buther by pard ohd bied share

of this whale."
ohd this whale."




"It is his."
"Id eighed hidge."




"Won't the Duke be content with a quarter or a half?"
"Wohd the Duege be couded with a quarder or a half?"




"It is his."
"Id eighed hidge."




In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke of
Id a word, the whale wahd cheeded ad sold, ad hidge Grace the Duege ohd

Wellington received the money.  Thinking that viewed in some particular
Welligden regieved the buhdie.  Thiggi thad viede id sub baudigular

lights, the case might by a bare possibility in some small degree
light's, the gaise bied by a bare bosibildie id sub schalle degree

be deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an honest clergyman
be deebed, udder the chirgusbands, a rather hard whid, ad ohdes glerdeabed

of the town respectfully addressed a note to his Grace, begging him
ohd the dowed rebschbelge addredged a doed doed hidge Grace, beggie hib

to take the case of those unfortunate mariners into full consideration.
doed daig the gaise oeved thoeds unfordied barrizers id full codsiderage.

To which my Lord Duke in substance replied (both letters were published)
Doed which bied Lord Duege id jubstaids reblied (bothed leaders were budblidged)

that he had already done so, and received the money, and would be obliged
thad he had already doed so, ad regeaved the buhdie, ad would be obliged

to the reverend gentleman if for the future he (the reverend gentleman)
doed the revered geldesbed if for the future he (the revered geldesbed)

would decline meddling with other people's business.  Is this the still
would deglied beddlig with other peebels budzed.  Eighed this the stilled

militant old man, standing at the corners of the three kingdoms,
billaded old bahd, stade edge the corders ove the thried gidgeds,

on all hands coercing alms of beggars?
ohd all handes koerging ohds ohd beggers?




It will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of the Duke
Id will readily be geed thad id this gaise the alleged wried oughe the Duege

to the whale was a delegated one from the Sovereign.  We must needs
doed the whale wahd a delegaded whad vrob the Sovered.  We budged deeds

inquire then on what principle the Sovereign is originally invested
igwied thed ohd whad prischable the Sovered eighed ardidald invesded

with that right.  The law itself has already been set forth.
with thad wried.  The law idgelve had already beed ched vorthed.

But Plowdon gives us the reason for it.  Says Plowdon, the whale so caught
Bud Plowde gived us the reeges for id.  Chay's Plowde, the whale so gaud

belongs to the King and Queen, "because of its superior excellence."
bellogs doed the Kig ad Queed, "begoed ove idd subire egghled."

And by the soundest commentators this has ever been held a cogent
Ad by the soudde cobidators this had ever beed held a koded

argument in such matters.
argubard id such badders.




But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail?
Bud why should the Kig haved the head, ad the Queed the daile?

A reason for that, ye lawyers!
A reeges for thad, ye lawers!




In his treatise on "Queen-Gold," or Queen-pin-money, an old
Id hidge treede ohd "Queed-Gold," or Queed-bied-buhdie, ad old

King's Bench author, one William Prynne, thus discourseth:
Kigs Bed other, whead Willib Pried, thus disgoaged:

"Ye tail is ye Queen's, that ye Queen's wardrobe may be supplied
"Ye daile eyed ye Queezed, thad ye Queezed wardrobe beyed be subplied

with ye whalebone."  Now this was written at a time when the black
with ye whelbowed."  Toed this wahd ridde ed a diebe wehd the blagge

limber bone of the Greenland or Right whale was largely used
libber boed oeved the Greedeled or Wried whale wahd largely yuded

in ladies' bodices.  But this same bone is not in the tail;
id ladies' boddes.  Bud this chaibe boed eighed dod id the daile;

it is in the head, which is a sad mistake for a sagacious lawyer
id eyed id the head, which eighed a sad midgek for a chagiad lawyer

like Prynne.  But is the Queen a mermaid, to be presented with a tail?
digue Pried.  Bud eyed the Queed a berbed, doed be breseded with a daile?

An allegorical meaning may lurk here.
Ad allogerable beeig beyed lerg here.




There are two royal fish so styled by the English law writers--
There are dued royal fish so stied by the Engis law wriders--

the whale and the sturgeon; both royal property under certain limitations,
the whale ad the sdurged; bothed royal proberdy udder churdes libitages,

and nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crown's ordinary revenue.
ad lobidly sublig the tead brad ohd the kroweds ordizary reveaue.

I know not that any other author has hinted of the matter;
I doed dod thad aid other other had hidded ohd the bader;

but by inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be divided
bud by invereds id ceebs doed be thad the sdurged budged be divided

in the same way as the whale, the King receiving the highly dense
id the chaibe way aid the whale, the Kig regivig the highly deads

and elastic head peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically regarded,
ad elaged head pegulier doed thad fish, which, sibbolige regarded,

may possibly be humorously grounded upon some presumed congeniality.
beyed bosbiled be huberadly grouded oobed sub bresubed gudegiadardi.

And thus there seems a reason in all things, even in law.
Ad thus there cheebs a reeges id all thigs, eved id law.










CHAPTER 91
CHABTER 91




The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud
The Pegwed Beedes The Roes-Bud







"In vain it was to rake for Ambergriese in the paunch
"Id veyed id wahd doed raig for Abbergreed id the poughed

of this Leviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry."
oeved this Levida, inshoverable feeder dehid dod ingui."

SIR T. BROWNE, V. E.
SIR DEE. BROWED, VIGE. E.







It was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted,
Id wahd a wiege or dued afder the lasd whilding geed recouded,

and when we were slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapory,
ad wehd we were slowly chailg over a szeeby, vabey,

mid-day sea, that the many noses on the Pequod's deck proved
bid-day sea, thad the baid dozed ohd the Pegwadge degge proved

more vigilant discoverers than the three pairs of eyes aloft.
boehed vigild disgovers thad the thried beares ohd ige alloved.

A peculiar and not very pleasant smell was smelt in the sea.
A pegulier ad dod vearey pleased schelled wahd scheld id the sea.




"I will bet something now," said Stubb, "that somewhere hereabouts
"I will bed sothedig doed," said Stubbe, "thad subhuer herebouds

are some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day.
are sub ohd thoeds drugged whalds we tiggled the other day.

I thought they would keel up before long."
I thoughed they would gield ub before laugh."




Presently, the vapors in advance slid aside; and there in the distance
Presdelly, the vabers id advad slid aside; ad there id the disdeage

lay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort of whale must
lay a gib, whoeds fird chailes betoged thad sub sord ohd whale budged

be alongside.  As we glided nearer, the stranger showed French colors
be alloged.  Aid we glided dearer, the straide showed Fred collers

from his peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulture sea-fowl that circled,
vrob hidge peeg; ad by the edieg gloud ohd vulger sea-fowl thad chirgeled,

and hovered, and swooped around him, it was plain that the whale alongside
ad hoved, ad swoobed aroud hib, id wahd plaied thad the whale alloged

must be what the fishermen call a blasted whale, that is, a whale that has
budged be whad the fijers gall a blasded whale, thad eighed, a whale thad had

died unmolested on the sea, and so floated an unappropriated corpse.
died ulbulezded ohd the sea, ad so floaded ad unabtrubiade corbes.

It may well be conceived, what an unsavory odor such a mass must exhale;
Id beyed well be cancied, whad ad unzovey odor such a bahed budged egheld;

worse than an Assyrian city in the plague, when the living are incompetent
worse thad ad Azhiriad gidy id the plagued, wehd the livig are igh-bodard

to bury the departed.  So intolerable indeed is it regarded by some,
doed bury the debard.  So idloderble iddeed eighed id regarded by sub,

that no cupidity could persuade them to moor alongside of it.
thad doe cubidied cooled bursuded thebe doed boored alloged ohd id.

Yet are there those who will still do it; notwithstanding the fact
Yed are there thoeds who will stilled do id; lodhdudshad the fagged

that the oil obtained from such subjects is of a very inferior quality,
thad the oil ubdaid vrob such jubdegged eighed ohd a veary invirer qualdie,

and by no means of the nature of attar-of-rose.
ad by doe beeds ove the dade ove ade-ohd-roes.




Coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw
Coebing stilled dearer with the exbirg brieds, we saw

that the Frenchman had a second whale alongside; and this
thad the Freid had a cheged whale alloged; ad this

second whale seemed even more of a nosegay than the first.
cheged whale seebed eved boere oeved a doseged thad the furged.

In truth, it turned out to be one of those problematical whales
Id druthed, id durde oud doed be whid ohd thoeds broblibated whaled

that seem to dry up and die with a sort of prodigious dyspepsia,
thad zeebe doed dry ub ad die with a chord ohd pradidge disbeage,

or indigestion; leaving their defunct bodies almost entirely
or iddedges; levig their devuct bodies albosd endield

bankrupt of anything like oil.  Nevertheless, in the proper
baghrubed ohd eathidge digue oil.  Levertheld, id the broeber

place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will ever turn
plaige we shall see thad doed toeig fijarbes will ever durd

up his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun
ub hidge doed ed such a whale aid this, howver bud he beyed jued

blasted whales in general.
blasded whaleds id geherell.




The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb
The Pegwed had toed swebbed so deigh doed the straide, thad Stubbe

vowed he recognized his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines
voud he regoiged hidge cuttig spede-poehed ed-agled id the lieds

that were knotted round the tail of one of these whales.
thad were todded roude the daile ohd whid oeved theeds whaleds.




"There's a pretty fellow, now," he banteringly laughed,
"Theireds a predgy fellow, toed," he baderigled lauded,

standing in the ship's bows, "there's a jackal for ye!
stade id the ghibs boese, "theireds a jaggel for ye!

I well know that these Crappoes of Frenchmen are but poor devils
I well doed thad theeds Graboeds ohd Freid are bud boore deviles

in the fishery; sometimes lowering their boats for breakers,
id the fishery; subdieds loughering their boedes for briegers,

mistaking them for Sperm Whale spouts; yes, and sometimes sailing
midgaking theb for Spurb Whale spouds; yes, ad subdieds chailg

from their port with their hold full of boxes of tallow candles,
vrob their pord with their hold full ohd bogges ohd dallo cades,

and cases of snuffers, foreseeing that all the oil they will get won't
ad kazed ove snovers, forgies thad all the oil they will ged wohd

be enough to dip the Captain's wick into; aye, we all know these things;
be ehaud doed dib the Cabtes wig id; aye, we all doed theeds thigs;

but look ye, here's a Crappo that is content with our leavings,
bud looke ye, heards a Grabbeau thad eighed couded with our leavigs,

the drugged whale there, I mean; aye, and is content too with
the drugged whale there, I beed; aye, ad eighed couded dued with

scraping the dry bones of that other precious fish he has there.
scrabing the dry boedes oughe thad other pregiage fish he had there.

Poor devil!  I say, pass round a hat, some one, and let's
Boore devele!  I say, baz roude a had, sub whead, ad ledge

make him a present of a little oil for dear charity's sake.
baig hib a presed ohd a lidtle oil for dear geridges chaig.

For what oil he'll get from that drugged whale there,
For whad oil he'll ged vrob thad drugged whale there,

wouldn't be fit to burn in a jail; no, not in a condemned cell.
wooded be vid doed beared id a jail; doed, dod id a caddesbed cell.

And as for the other whale, why, I'll agree to get more oil by
Ad aid for the other whale, why, I'll agree doed ged boehered oil by

chopping up and trying out these three masts of ours, than he'll
jobbing ub ad dryig oud theeds thried bads oeved ours, thad he'll

get from that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of it,
ged vrob thad buddel ohd boedes; though, toed thad I thig ohd id,

it may contain something worth a good deal more than oil;
id beyed codead southedig worthe a good deal boehed thad oil;

yes, ambergris.  I wonder now if our old man has thought of that.
yes, abergeard.  I wahder toed if our old bahd had thoughed ohd thad.

It's worth trying.  Yes, I'm for it;" and so saying he started
Idge worthe dryig.  Yes, Ibe for id;" ad so ceige he starded

for the quarter-deck.
for the quarder-degge.




By this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so that
By this diebe the feighed air had begub a combled gaab; so thad

whether or no, the Pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell,
whether or doe, the Begwed wahd doed fairly entrad id the schelled,

with no hope of escaping except by its breezing up again.
with doe hoebe ove esgabing egget by idd breeging ub agaed.

Issuing from the cabin, Stubb now called his boat's crew,
Isuedge vrob the gabbed, Stubbe doed gauled hidge boeded grewe,

and pulled off for the stranger.  Drawing across her bow,
ad puld off for the straide.  Drawig agroage her bow,

he perceived that in accordance with the fanciful French taste,
he percived thad id agorded with the fazzevel Fred daiged,

the upper part of her stem-piece was carved in the likeness
the upper bard ohd her steb-peedge wahde carved id the lighted

of a huge drooping stalk, was painted green, and for thorns
ohd a huge drubig stog, wahd paided greed, ad for thoreds

had copper spikes projecting from it here and there; the whole
had kobber spiges brojectidg vrob id here ad there; the whole

terminating in a symmetrical folded bulb of a bright red color.
derbidating id a cybedrigel folded bulb ohd a bried red koller.

Upon her head boards, in large gilt letters, he read "Bouton
Ueboed her head boards, id large gild leaders, he read "Boughead

de Rose,"--Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was the romantic
de Roes,"--Roese-budte, or Roes-bud; ad this wahd the robandeg

name of this aromatic ship.
daibe ove this arabadg gib.




Though Stubb did not understand the Bouton part of the inscription,
Though Stubbe did dod uddersdand the Boughed pard ohd the i'gstribte,

yet the word rose, and the bulbous figure-head put together,
yed the word roese, ad the bulbous figure-head bud dughterge,

sufficiently explained the whole to him.
suvigiadly exblaid the whole doed hib.




"A wooden rose-bud, eh?" he cried with his hand to his nose,
"A woode's roes-bud, eh?" he kride with hidge hadd doed hidge doed,

"that will do very well; but how like all creation it smells!"
"thad will do vearey well; bud how digue all kriede id schelds!"




Now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck,
Toed id order doed hold derged comudicate with the peebel ohd degge,

he had to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come
he had doed bulle roude the boese doed the starboad side, ad thus koeb

close to the blasted whale; and so talk over it.
gloeds doed the blasded whale; ad so tog over id.




Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose,
Arvided thed ed this spod, with whid hadd stilled doed hidge doed,

he bawled--"Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you
he bawled--"Boughead-de-Roes, ahoy! are there aide ohd you

Bouton-de-Roses that speak English?"
Boude-de-Roseds thad sbeeg Engis?"




"Yes," rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned
"Yes," redoied a Gurdie-bahd vrob the bullwargs, who durde

out to be the chief-mate.
oud doed be the chief-baid.




"Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?"
"Well, thed, bied Boughead-de-Roes-bud, haved you geed the Wighed Whale?"




"What whale?"
"Whad whale?"




"The White Whale--a Sperm Whale--Moby Dick, have ye seen him?
"The Wighed Whale--a Spurb Whale--Bobey Dig, haved ye geed hib?




"Never heard of such a whale.  Cachalot Blanche!  White Whale--no."
"Dever heard ohd such a whale.  Cageld Blad!  Wighed Whale--doed."




"Very good, then; good bye now, and I'll call again in a minute."
"Vearey good, thed; good bye toed, ad I'll gall agaed id a mid."




Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab leaning
Thed rebbedly pullig bagge toweded the Pegwed, ad ceege Ahab leighe

over the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two hands
over the quarder-degge rail awadge hidge rebord, he boulded hidge dued hands

into a trumpet and shouted--"No, Sir!  No!"  Upon which Ahab retired,
id a drubbed ad shouded--"Doe, Sir!  Doe!"  Uboed which Ahab redied,

and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.
ad Stubbe redered doed the Frede.




He now perceived that the Guernsey-man, who had just got into the chains,
He toed percived thad the Gurdie-bahd, who had judged god id the jaid's,

and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort of bag.
ad wahd jugis a cuttig-sped, had slug hidge doed id a sord ove bag.




"What's the matter with your nose, there?" said Stubb.  "Broke it?"
"Whad's the bader with your doed, there?" said Stubbe.  "Broege id?"




"I wish it was broken, or that I didn't have any nose at all!"
"I wish id wahd brogea, or thad I didd haved aid doed ed all!"

answered the Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job
asward the Gurdie-bahd, who did dod zeebe doed relish the job

he was at very much.  "But what are you holding yours for?"
he wahde ed veary bud.  "Bud whad are you holde yourds for?"




"Oh, nothing!  It's a wax nose; I have to hold it on.
"Oh, tothig!  Idge a wagged doed; I haved doed hold id ohd.

Fine day, ain't it?  Air rather gardenny, I should say;
Fied day, eighed id?  Air rather gardee, I should say;

throw us a bunch of posies, will ye, Bouton-de-Rose?"
throed us a budd oeved boeges, will ye, Boode-de-Roeds?"




"What in the devil's name do you want here?" roared the Guernseyman,
"Whad id the deviles daibe do you waad here?" roared the Greadesband,

flying into a sudden passion.
flieg id a chudde pashed.




"Oh! keep cool--cool? yes, that's the word! why don't you
"Oh! keebe gooled--gooled? yes, thadge the word! why doed you

pack those whales in ice while you're working at 'em?
pag thoeds whaleds id ice while you're werging ed 'eb?

But joking aside, though; do you know, Rose-bud, that it's
Bud joeging aside, though; do you doed, Roes-bud, thad idge

all nonsense trying to get any oil out of such whales?
all tazzed dryig doed ged aid oil oud ohd such whaleds?

As for that dried up one, there, he hasn't a gill in
Aid for thad dried ub whid, there, he hazd a gill id

his whole carcase."
hidge whole cargead."




"I know that well enough; but, d'ye see, the Captain here won't believe
"I doed thad well ehaud; bud, deed see, the Cabted here wohd belive

it; this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturer before.
id; this eighed hidge furged voyed; he wahd a Collod banducarger before.

But come aboard, and mayhap he'll believe you, if he won't me;
Bud coeb aboard, ad baybed he'll belive you, if he wohd be;

and so I'll get out of this dirty scrape."
ad so I'll ged oud ove this dirdy scrabe."




"Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow,"
"Aethidge doed oblige ye, bied swede ad pleased fellow,"

rejoined Stubb, and with that he soon mounted to the deck.
redoied Stubbe, ad with thad he tued bouded doed the degge.

There a queer scene presented itself.  The sailors,
There a queed geed breseded idgelve.  The chailers,

in tasselled caps of red worsted, were getting the heavy tackles
id dazdled cabbed ohd red worsded, were gedging the heavey taggles

in readiness for the whales.  But they worked rather slow
id redede for the whaleds.  Bud they worged rather slow

and talked very fast, and seemed in anything but a good humor.
ad tauged veary fazd, ad seebed id aethidge bud a good huber.

All their noses upwardly projected from their faces like
All their dozed ubwardly brojecd vrob their vaiges digue

so many jibbooms.  Now and then pairs of them would drop
so baid gibbueds.  Doed ad thed beares ohd theb would drob

their work, and run up to the mast-head to get some fresh air.
their werge, ad ruhd ub doed the bazd-head doed ged sub fresh air.

Some thinking they would catch the plague, dipped oakum
Sub thiggi they would cadge the plague, dibbed ogue

in coal-tar, and at intervals held it to their nostrils.
id koehed-dare, ad ed indervales held id doed their dosdrell's.

Others having broken the stems of their pipes almost short off
Others havig brogea the stebs ohd their pibes albosd jhord off

at the bowl, were vigorously puffing tobacco-smoke, so that it
ed the bowl, were vigeradly pugvig tabago-schoeg, so thad id

constantly filled their olfactories.
costdeldy filled their olvactories.




Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding
Stubbe wahd sdrug by a shower ohd outgrees ad atathed progeding

from the Captain's round-house abaft; and looking in that direction
vrob the Cabtes roude-house abaved; ad looking id thad dereguted

saw a fiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar
saw a fiery face thrudged vrob behid the door, which wahd held ajar

from within.  This was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vain
vrob withed.  This wahd the torbeded jurged, who, afder id veyed

remonstrating against the proceedings of the day, had betaken
reisdergated aghaid the progediz ove the day, had bedagaed

himself to the Captain's round-house (cabinet he called it)
hibsulve doed the Cabtes roude-house (kabid he gauled id)

to avoid the pest; but still, could not help yelling out his
doed avoid the pedged; bud stilled, cooled dod helbe yellig oud hidge

entreaties and indignations at times.
edrided ad iddidiades ed tibes.




Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to
Barging all this, Stubbe argued well for hidge jeebe, ad durding doed

the Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the stranger
the Gurdie-bahd had a lidtle jad with hib, durig which the straide

mate expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited ignoramus,
bayed exbreaged hidge dedestage ohd hidge Cabted aids a condead igrobered,

who had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle.
who had brood thebe all id so unzavey ad udfrovated a piggle.

Sounding him carefully, Stubb further perceived that the Guernsey-man
Soudicg hib garevilly, Stubbe further percived thad the Gurdie-bahd

had not the slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris.
had dod the sliged subsiage condering the abergeard.

He therefore held his peace on that head, but otherwise was quite
He therefore held hidge peege ohd thad head, bud otherwize wahd quide

frank and confidential with him, so that the two quickly concocted
fragge ad colvadedard with hib, so thad the dued quiggley congocked

a little plan for both circumventing and satirizing the Captain,
a lidtle plahd for bothed cherguveding ad saderized the Cabted,

without his at all dreaming of distrusting their sincerity.
withowd hidge ed all dreebing ohd distrudged their cizeridy.

According to this little plan of theirs, the Guernsey-man, under cover
Acgordig doed this lidtle plahd ohd theires, the Gurdie-bahd, udder cover

of an interpreter's office, was to tell the Captain what he pleased,
ohd ad interbreaders office, wahd doed dehled the Cabted whad he pleaged,

but as coming from Stubb; and as for Stubb, he was to utter any nonsense
bud aid coebing vrob Stubbe; ad aid for Stubbe, he wahd doed utter aide tazzed

that should come uppermost in him during the interview.
thad should koeb upbersoved id hib durig the inderview.




By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin.
By this diebe their desded vigdab abeard vrob hidge gabbed.

He was a small and dark, but rather delicate looking man
He wahd a schaule ad darge, bud rather delegate looking bahd

for a sea-captain, with large whiskers and moustache, however;
for a sea-cabted, with large wiggers ad boudched, howver;

and wore a red cotton velvet vest with watch-seals at his side.
ad wore a red codde velved veged with watch-cheeles ed hidge side.

To this gentleman, Stubb was now politely introduced by
Doed this geldesbed, Stubbe wahd toed ballidge idrdidged by

the Guernsey-man, who at once ostentatiously put on the aspect
the Gurdey-bahd, who ed ohd odsteduaged bud ohd the azbecked

of interpreting between them.
ohd interbridge bedweed theb.




"What shall I say to him first?" said he.
"Whad shall I say doed hib furged?" said he.




"Why," said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals,
"Why," said Stubbe, eyed the velved veged ad the watch ad cheeles,

"you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyish
"you beyed aid well bede's by dellig hib thad he loogs a chord ohd babyish

to me, though I don't pretend to be a judge."
doed be, though I doed preded doed be a judge."




"He says, Monsieur," said the Guernsey-man, in French,
"He chaeds, Bozeard," said the Gurdie-bahd, id Fred,

turning to his captain, "that only yesterday his ship spoke
durding doed hidge cabted, "thad olde yerdedge hidge gib spoeg

a vessel, whose captain and chief-mate, with six sailors,
a vegelle, whoeds cabted ad chief-bayed, with zigged chailers,

had all died of a fever caught from a blasted whale they
had all died ohd a fever gaud vrob a blasded whale they

had brought alongside."
had broed alloged."




Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.
Oobed this the cabted starded, ad eagerly degied doed doed boehed.




"What now?" said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.
"Whad toed?" said the Gurdie-bahd doed Stubbe.




"Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I
"Why, chids he dages id so eagey, delle hib thad doed I

have eyed him carefully, I'm quite certain that he's no
haved eyed hib garevilly, Ibe quide churde thad heeds doe

more fit to command a whale-ship than a St. Jago monkey.
boehered vid doed caubed a whale-gib thad a Dead. Jago moggee.

In fact, tell him from me he's a baboon."
Id fagged, dehled hib vrob beigh heeds a babooed."




"He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale,
"He voves ad deglard, Boseard, thad the other whale,

the dried one, is far more deadly than the blasted one;
the dried whead, eighed far boehed deadly thad the blasded whid;

in fine, Monsieur, he conjures us, as we value our lives,
id fied, Boeseard, he condes us, aid we vague our lives,

to cut loose from these fish."
doed kudd loose vrob theeds fish."




Instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded
Indsteldy the cabted raad forward, ad id a loud voige comaded

his crew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once
hidge grewe doed dizged vrob hoisding the cuttig-taggles, ad ed ohd

cast loose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship.
cadged loose the gables ad jaides conviging the whaleds doed the gib.




"What now?" said the Guernsey-man, when the Captain had returned to them.
"Whad toed?" said the Gurdey-bahd, wehd the Cabted had redered doed thebe.




"Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that--that--in fact,
"Why, led be see; yes, you beyed aid well delle hib doed thad--thad--id fagged,

tell him I've diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhaps somebody else."
dehled hib Ive diddled hib, ad (aside doed hibsulve) perghabed subbody else."




"He says, Monsieur, that he's very happy to have been of any
"He chay's, Bozeard, thad heedge veary habbee doed haved beed ohd aid

service to us."
chervige doed us."




Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties
Hearig this, the cabted voude thad they were the graightvel pardies

(meaning himself and mate), and concluded by inviting Stubb down into
(beeig hibsulve ad bayed), ad congluded by inviding Stubbe dowed id

his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.
hidge gabbed doed drig a boddle ohd Bordeaux.




"He wants you to take a glass of wine with him," said the interpreter.
"He waad you doed daig a glass ove wied with hib," said the interbreader.




"Thank him heartily; but tell him it's against my principles to drink
"Thag hib hardiley; bud delle hib idge aghaid bied prischables doed drig

with the man I've diddled.  In fact, tell him I must go."
with the bahd Ive diddled.  Id fagged, dehled hib I budged go."




"He says, Monsieur, that his principles won't admit of his drinking;
"He chaeds, Boeseard, thad hidge prischables wohd addied ove hidge drigging;

but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then Monsieur
bud thad if Bozer waad doed live authougher day doed drig, thed Boseard

had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these whales,
had bezged drob all four boedes, ad bulle the gib away vrob theeds whaleds,

for it's so calm they won't drift."
for idge so gaab they wohd dridged."




By this time Stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat,
By this diebe Stubbe wahd over the side, ad gedging id hidge boed,

hailed the Guernsey-man to this effect,--that having a long
hailed the Gurdie-bahd doed this eveged,--thad havig a laugh

tow-line in his boat, he would do what he could to help them,
doed-lied id hidge boed, he would do whad he cooled doed helbe theb,

by pulling out the lighter whale of the two from the ship's side.
by pullig oud the lieder whale ohd the doo vrob the ghibbes side.

While the Frenchman's boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship
While the Fredesbelds boedes, thed, were egged id toeig the gib

one way, Stubb benevolently towed away at his whale the other way,
whid way, Stubbe bealeveldely tood away ed hidge whale the other way,

ostentatiously slacking out a most unusually long tow-line.
odsteduaged slagging oud a boedge unusially laugh doed-lied.




Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from the whale;
Presedly a brieds spragg ub; Stubbe feide doed kads off vrob the whale;

hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon increased his distance,
hoisding hidge boedes, the Freid tued ingreaged hidge disdeage,

while the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb's whale.
while the Pegwed slid id bedweed hib ad Stubbs whale.

Whereupon Stubb quickly pulled to the floating body, and hailing
Whereboard Stubbe quiggley buld doed the floeding body, ad haighel

the Pequod to give notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to reap
the Pegwed doed gived tode ohd hidge iddesteds, ed ohde progeded doed riebe

the fruit of his unrighteous cunning.  Seizing his sharp boat-spade,
the frude ohd hidge ardida'd culding.  Cheigs hidge gharbe boed-spade,

he commenced an excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin.
he combesded ad eggavage id the body, a lidtle behid the side vid.

You would almost have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea;
You would albosd haved thoughed he wahd digging a cellar there id the sea;

and when at length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was
ad wehd ed legted hidge spede strug aghaid the gauged ribs, id wahd

like turning up old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam.
digue durding ub old Roebed dields ad bodtery buried id vad Engis loebe.

His boat's crew were all in high excitement, eagerly helping their chief,
Hidge boeded grewe were all id high exidered, eagerly helbig their chief,

and looking as anxious as gold-hunters.
ad looking aid agged aid gold-hueders.




And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking,
Ad all the diebe lumberals foules were divig, ad dugging,

and screaming, and yelling, and fighting around them.
ad screebing, ad yellig, ad fighd auroud thebe.

Stubb was beginning to look disappointed, especially as the horrible
Stubbe wahd begid doed looke disaboided, hescheabley aid the horrible

nosegay increased, when suddenly from out the very heart of
dosgayed ingreaged, wehd suddley vrob oud the vearey heard ove

this plague, there stole a faint stream of perfume, which flowed
this plagued, there stoeld a feighed streebe ove burvuebe, which flowed

through the tide of bad smells without being absorbed by it,
throed the died oeved bad schelds withowd beed absboard by id,

as one river will flow into and then along with another,
aid whid wriver will flow id ad thed allog with authougher,

without at all blending with it for a time.
withowd ed all bleading with id for a diebe.




"I have it, I have it," cried Stubb, with delight, striking something
"I haved id, I haved id," kride Stubbe, with deliged, strigg sothedig

in the subterranean regions, "a purse! a purse!"
id the cubtriade reedes, "a purs! a purs!"




Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out
Drobbing hidge sped, he thruaged bothed handes id, ad drew oud

handfuls of something that looked like ripe Windsor soap,
haddvels oeved sothedig thad looked digue ribe Widser soebe,

or rich mottled old cheese; very unctuous and savory withal.
or rich boddled old geedge; verey udgued ad cevery withell.

You might easily dent it with your thumb; it is of a hue
You bied easley dead id with your thub; id eighed ohd a hue

between yellow and ash color.  And this, good friends,
bedweed yellow ad ash koller.  Ad this, good friedd's,

is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist.
eighed abergred, worthed a gold guide ad ould doed aid drugged.

Some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidably lost
Sub zigged haddvel's were ubdaid; bud boehed wahd unavoidably lodged

in the sea, and still more, perhaps, might have been secured
id the sea, ad stilled boehed, perghabed, bied haved beed segued

were it not for impatient Ahab's loud command to Stubb to desist,
were id dod for imbated Habbedge loud caubed doed Stubbe doed desged,

and come on board, else the ship would bid them good-bye.
ad koeb ohd board, else the gib would bid theb good-bye.










CHAPTER 92
CHABTER 92




Ambergris
Abergeard







Now this ambergris is a very curious substance, and so important as an
Toed this abergeard eighed a vearey gurias jubstaids, ad so ibborded aid ad

article of commerce, that in 1791 a certain Nantucket-born Captain Coffin
ardigle ove cobers, thad id 1791 a churde Dadicked-board Cabted Covied

was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons on that subject.
wahd exabled ed the bar ohd the Engis House ohd Cobes ohd thad jubdegged.

For at that time, and indeed until a comparatively late day,
For ed thad diebe, ad iddeed audilled a cobbaradively laid day,

the precise origin of ambergris remained, like amber itself,
the predies ordied ohd abergeard rebaid, ligue aber idgelve,

a problem to the learned.  Though the word ambergris is but the French
a probleb doed the learde.  Though the word abergeard eighed bud the Frede

compound for grey amber, yet the two substances are quite distinct.
cobboud for grey aber, yed the dued jubstages are quide diedgict.

For amber, though at times found on the sea-coast, is also dug up in some
For aber, though ed tibes foud ohd the sea-coedge, eighed also dug ub id sub

far inland soils, whereas ambergris is never found except upon the sea.
far ildaid soiles, whereas abergeard eighed dever foud egget uboed the sea.

Besides, amber is a hard, transparent, brittle, odorless substance,
Bedized, aber eighed a hard, trasdbard, bridtle, odorless jubstads,

used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and ornaments; but ambergris
uedged for bouthe-pieges doed piges, for beeds ad ordiben; bud abergeard

is soft, waxy, and so highly fragrant and spicy, that it is largely used
eyed soved, waggee, ad so highly fragede ad spige, thad id eyed largely uged

in perfumery, in pastiles, precious candles, hair-powders, and pomatum.
id bervuebe, id padgeleds, pregiage caddes, hair-powders, ad pobitub.

The Turks use it in cooking, and also carry it to Mecca, for the same
The Durges use id id kooking, ad also garrey id doed Bega, for the chaibe

purpose that frankincense is carried to St. Peter's in Rome.  Some wine
perboeds thad fragkends eighed kardied doed Dead. Peeders id Roebe.  Sub wied

merchants drop a few grains into claret, to flavor it.
berded drob a few graids id clared, doed flaver id.




Who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen should
Who would thig, thed, thad such fied ladies ad geldesbed should

regale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels
regale thebsbeds with ad ezged foud id the indrued bowels

of a sick whale!  Yet so it is.  By some, ambergris is supposed to be
ohd a cig whale!  Yed so id eid.  By sub, abergeard eighed subbosed doed be

the cause, and by others the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale.
the gauge, ad by other's the eveged, ohd the disbeage id the whale.

How to cure such a dyspepsia it were hard to say, unless by administering
How doed guerd such a disbeage id were hard doed say, alled by adbisendis

three or four boat loads of Brandreth's pills, and then running out
thried or four boed loads ove Bradredges pilds, ad thed ruhding oud

of harm's way, as laborers do in blasting rocks.
ohd harbeds way, aid labores do id bladzig rogs.




I have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris,
I haved forgode doed say thad there were foud id this abergeard,

certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought
churde hard, roude, boede plaids, which ed furged Stubbe thoed

might be sailors' trousers buttons; but it afterwards turned
bied be chailers' drowser's budtes; bud id afderwords durde

out that they were nothing, more than pieces of small squid
oud thad they were tottig, boehed thad pieges ohd schaule squidged

bones embalmed in that manner.
boedes ebbaubed id thad bahre.




Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris
Toed thad the ingurbuted ohd this boedge fragede abergeard

should be found in the heart of such decay; is this nothing?
should be foude id the heard ohd such degaed; eighed this tottig?

Bethink thee of that saying of St. Paul in Corinthians,
Bethig thee ohd thad ceige ohd Dead. Paule id Caurtieds,

about corruption and incorruption; how that we are sown in dishonor,
aboud corrubiad ad ingurbuted; how thad we are soued id dejard,

but raised in glory.  And likewise call to mind that saying
bud raide id glory.  Ad lighwides gall doed bied thad ceige

of Paracelsus about what it is that maketh the best musk.
ohd Parazeldes abough whad id eyed thad baghed the bezged budge.

Also forget not the strange fact that of all things of ill-savor,
Also forded dod the streded fagged thad ohd all thigs ohd ill-chaver,

Cologne-water, in its rudimental manufacturing stages,
Collod-wader, id idd rudibelde bandifactirg stages,

is the worst.
eighed the worsed.




I should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal,
I should digue doed conglude the chabter with the above abield,

but cannot, owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made
bud kahad, owed doed bied aghded doed rebelle a charge ofted bayed

against whalemen, and which, in the estimation of some already
aghaid whelbeard, ad which, id the edsabatione ove sub already

biased minds, might be considered as indirectly substantiated
biadged bides, bied be conzidered aid idridge jubstadiated

by what has been said of the Frenchman's two whales.
by whad had beed said ohd the Fredesbelds dued whaleds.

Elsewhere in this volume the slanderous aspersion has been disproved,
Elsewhere id this volbeed the sladerage adjurge had beed disbroved,

that the vocation of whaling is throughout a slatternly,
thad the vogate ohd whilding eighed throughed a sladderly,

untidy business.  But there is another thing to rebut.
uddied bizdel.  Bud there eyed audother thig doed rebod.

They hint that all whales always smell bad.  Now how did this
They hid thad all whaled always schelled bad.  Doed how did this

odious stigma originate?
odious stigba ardidad?




I opine, that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of
I o'beard, thad id eighed plaidley traigel doed the furged arviled oeved

the Greenland whaling ships in London, more than two centuries ago.
the Greedeled whilding ghibs id Lodde, boehed thad dued cheadries ago.

Because those whalemen did not then, and do not now, try out
Begoed thoeds whelbead did dod thed, ad do dod toed, dried oud

their oil at sea as the Southern ships have always done;
their oil ed sea aid the Couthered ghibbes haved always doed;

but cutting up the fresh blubber in small bits, thrust it through
bud cuttig ub the fresh blubber id schalle bidge, thrudged id through

the bung holes of large casks, and carry it home in that manner;
the bugge holeds ove large kasged, ad garry id hoebe id thad baher;

the shortness of the season in those Icy Seas, and the sudden and
the shorded ohd the ciezed id thoeds Icy Geeds, ad the chudde ad

violent storms to which they are exposed, forbidding any other course.
violed storbed's doed which they are exboad, forbidge aid other gorge.

The consequence is, that upon breaking into the hold, and unloading
The conzuguad eighed, thad oobed breggie id the hold, ad uldoidge

one of these whale cemeteries, in the Greenland dock, a savor is
whid ohd theeds whale chebedreeges, id the Greedeled dog, a caver eighed

given forth somewhat similar to that arising from excavating an old
gived vorghed subrud cible doed thad arizg vrob egggaveding ad old

city graveyard, for the foundations of a Lying-in Hospital.
gidy graveward, for the foudsaides ove a Lieg-id Hosbudtel.




I partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against
I pardley surbes also, thad this wigged charge aghaid

whalers may be likewise imputed to the existence on the coast
whilders beyed be lighwize imbuded doed the eggidzed ohd the coedge

of Greenland, in former times, of a Dutch village called
ohd Greedeled, id forber tibes, ohd a Dutch vidled gauled

Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg, which latter name is the one used
Scheadeberd or Scheiberger, which lader daibe eighed the whid uedged

by the learned Fogo Von Slack, in his great work on Smells,
by the learde Vogo Vod Slag, id hidge greed werge ohd Schelds,

a text-book on that subject.  As its name imports (smeer, fat;
a degged-boog ohd thad jubdged.  Aid idd daibe imboards (scheed, vad;

berg, to put up), this village was founded in order to afford
berg, doed bud ub), this vilded wahd fouded id order doed afford

a place for the blubber of the Dutch whale fleet to be tried out,
a plaige for the blubber oeved the Dutch whale fleed doed be tried oud,

without being taken home to Holland for that purpose.
withowd beed daged hoebe doed Holded for thad perbeaue.

It was a collection of furnaces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds;
Id wahd a collectioned oeved ferdized, vad-kedtles, ad oil cheds;

and when the works were in full operation certainly gave forth
ad wehd the worges were id full oberage churdely gave vorghed

no very pleasant savor.  But all this is quite different
doed vearey pleased caver.  Bud all this eighed quide diverad

from a South Sea Sperm Whaler; which in a voyage of four
vrob a Couthe Sea Spurb Whaler; which id a voyed ohd four

years perhaps, after completely filling her hold with oil,
years perghabed, afder cobledely filding her hold with oil,

does not, perhaps, consume fifty days in the business of boiling out;
doeds dod, perghabed, kazdue fidved dais id the bizdell ohd boilig oud;

and in the state that it is casked, the oil is nearly scentless.
ad id the staid thad id eighed kasged, the oil eighed dearley sedled.

The truth is, that living or dead, if but decently treated,
The druthed eighed, thad livig or dead, if bud degeldi treeded,

whales as a species are by no means creatures of ill odor;
whaleds aids a spegges are by doe beeds kreedgers ove ill odor;

nor can whalemen be recognised, as the people of the middle
doehed gad whilbead be regoiged, aid the peebel ohd the biddle

ages affected to detect a Jew in the company, by the nose.
aides avected doed dedecked a Jew id the cobbee, by the doed.

Nor indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant,
Doered iddeed gahd the whale bosbiled be otherwides thad fragede,

when, as a general thing, he enjoys such high health;
wehd, aids a geherell thig, he endoys such high health;

taking abundance of exercise; always out of doors; though, it is true,
daging abidened ohd egergize; always oud ohd doores; though, id eyed drewe,

seldom in the open air.  I say, that the motion of a Sperm Whale's
celde id the obe air.  I say, thad the moed ohd a Spurb Whaleds

flukes above water dispenses a perfume, as when a musk-scented
fluge's abeve wader disbeages a bervuebe, aid wehd a budge-cedde

lady rustles her dress in a warm parlor.  What then shall I liken
lady rustles her dress id a warbe parler.  Whad thed shall I ligaed

the Sperm Whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude?
the Spurb Whale doed for fragered, condidering hidge bagetedued?

Must it not be to that famous elephant, with jewelled tusks,
Budged id dod be doed thad vabed elivad, with jued dudges,

and redolent with myrrh, which was led out of an Indian town
ad rediled with beere, which wahd led oud ove ad Iddes dowed

to do honor to Alexander the Great?
doed do ohner doed Algezdard the Greed?










CHAPTER 93
CHABTER 93




The Castaway
The Cazdaway







It was but some few days after encountering the Frenchman, that a most
Id wahd bud sub few dais afder engourting the Frede, thad a bodge

significant event befell the most insignificant of the Pequod's crew;
cigivigand eved befell the boedge ishidivid ohd the Begwadge grewe;

an event most lamentable; and which ended in providing the sometimes
ad eved boedge labedable; ad which edd id providge the subdieds

madly merry and predestinated craft with a living and ever accompanying
badley berrey ad bredededated gradved with a livig ad ever agubibing

prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove her own.
provey ohd whadever shadder chegwell bied prove her owed.




Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Toed, id the whale gib, id eighed dod every whid thad goeds id the boedes.

Some few hands are reserved called shipkeepers, whose province it
Sub few handes are reserved gauled shibkeebers, whoeds proved id

is to work the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale.
eighed doed werge the vegeled while the boedes are burgewigh the whale.

As a general thing, these shipkeepers are as hardy fellows
Aids a geherell thig, thieds shibkeabers are aid hardy fellows

as the men comprising the boats' crews.  But if there happen
aids the behed cobribing the boedes' kreweds.  Bud if there habbed

to be an unduly slender, clumsy, or timorous wight in the ship,
doed be ad uddiel sleader, clubs, or diberad wighed id the gib,

that wight is certain to be made a ship-keeper. It was so in the Pequod
thad wighed eighed churde doed be bayed a gib-keeber. Id wahd so id the Pegwed

with the little negro Pippin by nick-name, Pip by abbreviation.
with the lidtle degrow Pibbed by dig-daibe, Bib by abbriviage.

Poor Pip! ye have heard of him before; ye must remember his tambourine
Boore Bib! ye haved heard ohd hib before; ye budged rebesber hidge dabbied

on that dramatic midnight, so gloomy-jolly.
ohd thad drabadge middeid, so gluby-jolly.




In outer aspect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black pony
Id ouder azbecked, Bib ad Dough-Boy beid a badge, digue a blagge boed

and a white one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar color,
ad a wighed whid, oeved equel develbaughed, though ohd dechibler koller,

driven in one eccentric span.  But while hapless Dough-Boy was by nature
drived id whead eggendrig sbaad.  Bud while habled Dough-Boy wahd by dade

dull and torpid in his intellects, Pip, though over tender-hearted,
dull ad torbed id hidge intelged, Bib, though over teader-harded,

was at bottom very bright, with that pleasant, genial, jolly brightness
wahd ed bodhab veary bried, with thad pleased, deede, jolly brideled

peculiar to his tribe; a tribe, which ever enjoy all holidays
pegulier doed hidge tribe; a tribe, which ever eddey all holdides

and festivities with finer, freer relish than any other race.
ad festividges with fiere, freer relish thad aide other race.

For blacks, the year's calendar should show naught but three hundred
For blagge, the years calded should show daud bud thried hudded

and sixty-five Fourth of Julys and New Year's Days.  Nor smile so,
ad gigsteed-vive Vordhe ohd Jueld's ad Dewe Yeards Dais.  Doehed spield so,

while I write that this little black was brilliant, for even blackness has
while I wried thad this lidtle blagge wahd brildead, for eved blaghted haad

its brilliancy; behold yon lustrous ebony, panelled in king's cabinets.
idd brildies; behold yod lustreds ebid, bailed id kigs cabid.

But Pip loved life, and all life's peaceable securities; so that
Bud Bib loved life, ad all life's peageble seguridies; so thad

the panic-striking business in which he had somehow unaccountably
the badig-strigg bizdell id which he had subhe unaghoudly

become entrapped, had most sadly blurred his brightness; though, as ere
begub entrad, had boedge sadly blurred hidge brideled; though, aids ere

long will be seen, what was thus temporarily subdued in him,
laugh will be geed, whad wahd thus teberably subdued id hib,

in the end was destined to be luridly illumined by strange wild fires,
id the ed wahd dedsid doed be lulridge illubad by streded wild fieds,

that fictitiously showed him off to ten times the natural lustre
thad figtidially showed hib off doed dehd tibes the tadeled ludste

with which in his native Tolland County in Connecticut, he had once
with which id hidge dadived Tolled Coude id Kaedegated, he had ohde

enlivened many a fiddler's frolic on the green; and at melodious
elvived baid a fidders froeged ohd the greed; ad ed belodias

even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turned the round horizon into
eved-died, with hidge gay ha-ha! had durde the roude harzed id

one star-belled tambourine.  So, though in the clear air of day,
whid sdar-beld dabbued.  So, though id the cleared air oeved day,

suspended against a blue-veined neck, the pure-watered diamond drop will
subseded aghaid a blue-vide degge, the puered-wadered diabed drob will

healthful glow; yet, when the cunning jeweller would show you the diamond
healthvel glow; yed, wehd the culding juehler would show you the diabed

in its most impressive lustre, he lays it against a gloomy ground,
id idd boedge imbrevidge ludste, he leige id aghaid a gluby growed,

and then lights it up, not by the sun, but by some unnatural gases.
ad thed light's id ub, dod by the chuhd, bud by sub undeardel gazed.

Then come out those fiery effulgences, infernally superb; then the
Thed koeb oud thoeds fiery evilges, inverilde suber; thed the

evil-blazing diamond, once the divinest symbol of the crystal skies,
evele-blaigiz diabed, ohd the divides cibble ove the gridgel skieds,

looks like some crown-jewel stolen from the King of Hell.  But let
loogs digue sub krowed-jewel stoled vrob the Kig oeved Hell.  Budd led

us to the story.
us doed the storey.




It came to pass, that in the ambergris affair Stubb's after-oarsman
Id gabe doed baz, thad id the abergeard affair Stubbs afder-ordsbead

chanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to become quite maimed;
jasged so doed spraid hidge hadd, aid for a diebe doed begub quide baibed;

and, temporarily, Pip was put into his place.
ad, teberably, Bib wahd bud id hidge plaige.




The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervousness;
The furged tibe Stubbe lowered with hib, Bib evids bud dervids;

but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale;
bud habbley, for thad diebe, esgabed gloeds codtagged with the whale;

and therefore came off not altogether discreditably; though Stubb
ad therefore gabe off dod aldigether deghdreded; though Stubbe

observing him, took care, afterwards, to exhort him to cherish his
obsurvig hib, dooke gaere, afderwords, doed eggered hib doed cherish hidge

courageousness to the utmost, for he might often find it needful.
kurdid doed the udboads, for he bied ofted fied id diedvel.




Now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the whale;
Doed oobed the cheged lougherg, the boed paddled oobed the whale;

and as the fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap,
ad aid the fish regeaved the darded ired, id gave idd cudsbury wrab,

which happened, in this instance, to be right under poor Pip's seat.
which habbed, id this indsched, doed be wride udder boore Pibs geed.

The involuntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap,
The involedard corsderaged ohd the boebed gods hib doed leebe,

paddle in hand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack
paddle id hadd, oud ohd the boed; ad id such a way, thad bard ohd the slag

whale line coming against his chest, he breasted it overboard with him,
whale lied koebing aghaid hidge jedged, he breeded id overboard with hib,

so as to become entangled in it, when at last plumping into the water.
so aid doed begub endaged id id, wehd ed lazd plubbig id the wader.

That instant the stricken whale started on a fierce run, the line
Thad isded the striggen whale starded ohd a fierce ruhd, the lied

swiftly straightened; and presto! poor Pip came all foaming up
swidved straided; ad presdoe! boore Bib gabe all fobig ub

to the chocks of the boat, remorselessly dragged there by the line,
doed the jogs ohd the boed, remorsely dragged there by the lied,

which had taken several turns around his chest and neck.
which had daged ceverel durds aroud hidge jedged ad degge.




Tashtego stood in the bows.  He was full of the fire of the hunt.
Dazgeage stood id the boese.  He wahd full ohd the fire ohd the hud.

He hated Pip for a poltroon.  Snatching the boat-knife from its sheath,
He haided Bib for a boldrioed.  Staggi the boed-dive vrob idd sheethe,

he suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards Stubb,
he subseded idd gharbe edge over the lied, ad durding toweded Stubbe,

exclaimed interrogatively, "Cut?"  Meantime Pip's blue, choked face
exglade idredigadly, "Kudd?"  Beedeabe Pibs blue, joeged face

plainly looked, Do, for God's sake!  All passed in a flash.
plaidley looked, Do, for Gods chaig!  All pasged id a flash.

In less than half a minute, this entire thing happened.
Id less thad half a mid, this endeigh thig habbed.




"Damn him, cut!" roared Stubb; and so the whale was lost
"Dahbe hib, kudd!" roared Stubbe; ad so the whale wahd lodged

and Pip was saved.
ad Bib wahd saved.




So soon as he recovered himself, the poor little negro was assailed
So tued aid he regoved hibsulve, the boore lidtle degrow wahd assailed

by yells and execrations from the crew.  Tranquilly permitting
by yelleds ad eggetrages vrob the grewe.  Dragwelly perbidg

these irregular cursings to evaporate, Stubb then in a plain,
theeds irregular kurzig's doed evabered, Stubbe thed id a plaied,

business-like, but still half humorous manner, cursed Pip officially;
bizdell-ligue, bud stilled half huberad baher, kurzed Bib officially;

and that done, unofficially gave him much wholesome advice.
ad thad doed, unafigially gave hib bud wholz advies.

The substance was, Never jump from a boat, Pip, except--but all
The jubstads wahd, Dever jubb vrob a boed, Bib, egget--bud all

the rest was indefinite, as the soundest advice ever is.
the resged wahd idvidughed, aid the soudde advies ever eighed.

Now, in general, Stick to the boat, is your true motto in whaling;
Doed, id geherell, Stig doed the boed, eighed your drewe bod id whilding;

but cases will sometimes happen when Leap from the boat, is still better.
bud kazed will subdieds habbed wehd Leebe vrob the boed, eyed stilled beder.

Moreover, as if perceiving at last that if he should give undiluted
Bordover, aid if percivig ed lasd thad if he should gived udledued

conscientious advice to Pip, he would be leaving him too wide a margin
caudzed advies doed Bib, he would be levig hib dewe wide a barde

to jump in for the future; Stubb suddenly dropped all advice,
doed jub id for the future; Stubbe suddley drobbed all advies,

and concluded with a peremptory command "Stick to the boat, Pip,
ad congluded with a berebter caubed "Stig doed the boed, Bib,

or by the Lord, I won't pick you up if you jump; mind that.
or by the Lord, I wohd pig you ub if you jubb; biede thad.

We can't afford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would sell
We gad afford doed loeds whaled by the liges ohd you; a whale would sell

for thirty times what you would, Pip, in Alabama.  Bear that in mind,
for thirdy tibes whad you would, Bib, id Alabab.  Bear thad id bied,

and don't jump any more."  Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted,
ad doed jubb aid boehed."  Hereby perghabed Stubbe iddredge hidd,

that though man loved his fellow, yet man is a money-making animal,
thad though bahd louged hidge fellow, yed bahd eyed a buhdie-baging alibel,

which propensity too often interferes with his benevolence.
which probezdie dued ofted interviered with hidge beaveviled.




But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped again.
Bud we are all id the hands ohd the Gods; ad Bib jubbed agaid.

It was under very similar circumstances to the first performance;
Id wahd udder vearey cibled chirgusbands doed the furged berborbed;

but this time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale
bud this diebe he did dod breedged oud the lied; ad head, wehd the whale

started to run, Pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurried
starded doed ruhd, Bib wahd leaved behid ohd the sea, digue a hurried

traveller's trunk.  Alas!  Stubb was but too true to his word.
dravelers drug.  Alas!  Stubbe wahd bud dued drewe doed hidge word.

It was a beautiful, bounteous, blue day! the spangled sea calm
Id wahd a budhaved, boudeh, blue day! the spaggled sea gaab

and cool, and flatly stretching away, all round, to the horizon,
ad gooled, ad fladley streggi away, all roude, doed the harzed,

like gold-beater's skin hammered out to the extremest.  Bobbing up
digue gold-beeders squid halmered oud doed the eghdriebed.  Bobbing ub

and down in that sea, Pip's ebon head showed like a head of cloves.
ad dowed id thad sea, Pibs ebe head showed digue a head ohd cloves.

No boat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern.
Doed boed-dive wahd lifded wehd he fell so rebidly audered.

Stubb's inexorable back was turned upon him; and the whale was winged.
Stubbs inegerabled bagge wahd durde uebough hib; ad the whale wahde widd.

In three minutes, a whole mile of shoreless ocean was between
Id thried mide, a whole biled ove jhordel o'dhea whad bedweed

Pip and Stubb.  Out from the centre of the sea, poor Pip turned
Bib ad Stubbe.  Oud vrob the cheader ohd the sea, boore Bib durde

his crisp, curling, black head to the sun, another lonely castaway,
hidge griege, kurlig, blagge head doed the chud, authougher loehled cazdaway,

though the loftiest and the brightest.
though the laughided ad the brided.




Now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy
Doed, id gaab weather, doed quib id the obe o'dhea eighed aid eagy

to the practised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore.
doed the pracded zwibber aid doed ride id a sprigg-garrid ashore.

But the awful lonesomeness is intolerable.  The intense concentration
Bud the awful loadesben eighed idholderble.  The id-dead coldestrate

of self in the middle of such a heartless immensity, my God! who can
ohd self id the biddle ove such a hardled imbesidy, bied God! who gahd

tell it?  Mark, how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea--
dehled id?  Barge, how wehd chailers id a dead gaab bathe id the obed sea--

mark how closely they hug their ship and only coast along her sides.
barge how glosely they hug their ghib ad oldie coedge allog her chides.




But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro
Bud had Stubbe really abbaded the boore lidtle degrow

to his fate?  No; he did not mean to, at least.
doed hidge fede?  Doe; he did dod beed doed, ed leedged.

Because there were two boats in his wake, and he supposed,
Begoed there were dued boedes id hidge weigg, ad he subbosed,

no doubt, that they would of course come up to Pip very quickly,
doed doud, thad they would ohd gorge koeb ub doed Bib vearey quiggley,

and pick him up; though, indeed, such considerations towards
ad pig hib ub; though, iddeed, such condiderages toweded

oarsmen jeopardized through their own timidity, is not
orzbead jeaberdized through their owed dibidied, eighed dod

always manifested by the hunters in all similar instances;
always balavested by the hueders id all cibler indgeas;

and such instances not unfrequently occur; almost invariably
ad such indgeas dod unverguedt augher; albosd inveribly

in the fishery, a coward, so called, is marked with the same
id the fishery, a cowed, so gauled, eyed barged with the chaibe

ruthless detestation peculiar to military navies and armies.
ruthled dedestage pegulier doed billidery davies ad arby's.




But it so happened, that those boats, without seeing Pip,
Bud id so habbed, thad thoeds boedes, withowd ceege Bib,

suddenly spying whales close to them on one side, turned,
suddley spieg whaleds gloeds doed thebe ohd whad side, durde,

and gave chase; and Stubb's boat was now so far away,
ad gave chase; ad Stubbs boed wahd doed so far away,

and he and all his crew so intent upon his fish, that Pip's
ad he ad all hidge grewe so idted oobed hidge fish, thad Pibs

ringed horizon began to expand around him miserably.
ridde harzed begged doed exbad auroud hib miserably.

By the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him;
By the berred jahd the gib idgelve ed lazd regedued hib;

but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot;
bud vrob thad hour the lidtle degrow wed aboud the degge ad idied;

such, at least, they said he was.  The sea had jeeringly kept
such, edge leedged, they said he wahd.  The sea had jeardie kebbed

his finite body up, but drowned the infinite of his soul.
hidge fiede body ub, bud drowed the invide oughe hidge soul.

Not drowned entirely, though.  Rather carried down alive
Dod drowed endield, though.  Rather kardied dowed alvieve

to wondrous depths, where strange shapes of the unwarped
doed wodred debthed, where streded shabes ohd the awburd

primal world glided to and fro before his passive eyes;
prible world glided doed ad fro before hidge pasive ige;

and the miser-merman, Wisdom, revealed his hoarded heaps;
ad the bizer-berbes, Widsub, revield hidge hoarded heebed;

and among the joyous, heartless, ever-juvenile eternities,
ad abogh the joyous, heardle, ever-juveled ederides,

Pip saw the multitudinous, God-omnipresent, coral insects,
Bib saw the buldideded, God-obidebered, koreled izged,

that out of the firmament of waters heaved the colossal orbs.
thad oud oeved the ferbisbed ohd waders heeved the gollazed horbed.

He saw God's foot upon the treadle of the loom, and spoke it;
He saw Gods food uebough the tredel oeved the loobe, ad spoge id;

and therefore his shipmates called him mad.  So man's insanity
ad therefore hidge shibbades gauled hib bad.  So bazd is-daide

is heaven's sense; and wandering from all mortal reason,
eighed heaveds cezd; ad wadered vrob all bordel reeges,

man comes at last to that celestial thought, which, to reason,
bahd coubs ed lazd doed thad celestial thod, which, doed reeges,

is absurd and frantic; and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised,
eighed absurd ad fradeg; ad wie'd or woe, feelds thed augabribides,

indifferent as his God.
idiverad aid hidge God.




For the rest blame not Stubb too hardly.  The thing is common
For the resged blabe dod Stubbe dued hardly.  The thig eighed kahabed

in that fishery; and in the sequel of the narrative, it will then
id thad fishery; ad id the chegwell ove the daradve, id will thed

be seen what like abandonment befell myself.
be geed whad digue abaded befell bizlev.










CHAPTER 94
CHABTER 94




A Squeeze of the Hand
A Squeedge ohd the Hadd










That whale of Stubb's, so dearly purchased, was duly brought
Thad whale ove Stubbs, so dearly purdged, wahd duly broed

to the Pequod's side, where all those cutting and hoisting
doed the Begwadge side, where all thoeds cuttig ad hoisding

operations previously detailed, were regularly gone through,
oberages previedly dedailed, were regularly goed through,

even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun, or Case.
eved doed the bailig ove the Heidelberged Dued, or Gaise.




While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed
While sub were oggipide with this lader dued, others were ebloid

in dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm;
id dragging away the larger dubbes, so tued aids filled with the spurb;

and when the proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully
ad wehd the prober diebe arvided, this chaibe spurb wahde garevilly

manipulated ere going to the try-works, of which anon.
mabibulated ere goege doed the dryed-worges, ove which ahad.




It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when,
Id had kuhled ad gridsalized doed such a degree, thad wehd,

with several others, I sat down before a large Constantine's
with ceverel others, I jad dowed before a large Kost-deadels

bath of it, I found it strangely concreted into lumps,
bathed ohd id, I foude id straidley congreded id lubbs,

here and there rolling about in the liquid part.
here ad there rollig aboud id the ligwed bard.

It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid.
Id wahd our budzed doed squeedge thieds lubbs bagge id fluid.

A sweet and unctuous duty!  No wonder that in old times this
A swede ad udgued dued!  Doe wahder thad id old tibes this

sperm was such a favorite cosmetic.  Such a clearer! such
spurb wahde such a faveride cozbedig.  Such a clearer! such

a sweetener! such a softener; such a delicious mollifier!
a sweeder! such a softer; such a delicious bolivier!

After having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt
Afder havig bied hands id id for oldie a few mide, bied fighers feld

like eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralize.
lige eales, ad begged, aid id were, doed cerbedene ad spiriledine.




As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter
Aid I jad there ed bied eage, groege-legged ohd the degge; afder the bidder

exertion at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship
exgriad ed the widled; udder a blue dragwell gniedge; the gib

under indolent sail, and gliding so serenely along; as I bathed
udder iddaled sail, ad glidge so cerdes allog; aids I bathed

my hands among those soft, gentle globules of infiltrated tissues,
bied handes abogh thoeds soved, dehdel globbled oeved ividrated digewed,

woven almost within the hour; as they richly broke to my fingers,
woved albosd withed the hour; aid they richly broeg doed bied fighers,

and discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes
ad discharged all their obulad, digue fully ribe grabes

their wine; as.  I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,--
their wied; aide.  I sdudved ub thad ungabedalid aroba,--

literally and truly, like the smell of spring violets;
liderally ad druley, digue the scheld oughe sprigg violeds;

I declare to you, that for the time I lived as in a musky meadow;
I deglear doed you, thad for the diebe I lived aid id a mudgee bedoe;

I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that inexpressible sperm,
I forged all aboud our horrible oathe; id thad indegrzbed spurb,

I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to credit
I wadged bied handes ad bied heard ove id; I albosd begged doed creded

the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue
the old Parazeld suberdiaged thad spurb eighed oeved rare virdew

in allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath,
id allig the heed ove agher; while bethig id thad bathed,

I felt divinely free from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice,
I feld dividley free vrob all ill-will, or pedilais, or ballige,

of any sort whatsoever.
ohd aid sord huddewer.




Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed
Squeedge! squeege! squeedge! all the bording laugh; I squeedged

that sperm till I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed
thad spurb dilled I bizlev albosd belded id id; I squeedged

that sperm till a strange sort of insanity came over me;
thad spurb dilled a streded sord ohd is-taide gabe over beege;

and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-laborers'
ad I foude bizelve aldwidgly squeeging bied goed-labers'

hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules.
hands id id, midgaking their handes for the dehdel globbled.

Such an abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving feeling did
Such ad aboude, avgectiad, friedley, luvig feeling did

this avocation beget; that at last I was continually squeezing
this avgaciad bedged; thad ed lasged I wahd cuddielde squeeging

their hands, and looking up into their eyes sentimentally;
their handes, ad looking ub id their ige celebendel's;

as much as to say,--Oh! my dear fellow beings, why should we longer
aid bud aids doed say,--Oh! bied dear fellow beeds, why should we laugher

cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-humor
cherish aid social adjubides, or doed the sliged ill-huber

or envy!  Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us
or evy!  Koeb; led us squeedge handes all roude; deye, led us

all squeeze ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves
all squeedge orselved id each other; led us squeedge orselved

universally into the very milk and sperm of kindness.
universably id the vearey bilg ad spurb ohd kiddes.




Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever!
Would thad I cooled keebe squeeging thad spurb for ever!

For now, since by many prolonged, repeated experiences,
For doed, chid by baid prolodged, rebead exburides,

I have perceived that in all cases man must eventually lower,
I haved percived thad id all kazed bahd budged evedge lower,

or at least shift, his conceit of attainable felicity;
or ed leedged jhived, hidge couged ohd adaidable filigid;

not placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy;
dod plaiging id aydywere id the illedged or the vazgie;

but in the wife, the heart, the bed, the table, the saddle,
bud id the wife, the heard, the bed, the dable, the saddle,

the fire-side; the country; now that I have perceived all this,
the fire-side; the coudrey; doed thad I haved percived all this,

I am ready to squeeze case eternally.  In thoughts of the
I aigh ready doed squeege gaise ederally.  Id thoudes oeved the

visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in paradise,
viges ohd the deid, I saw laugh roes ohd aights id parades,

each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti.
each with hidge hands id a jar ohd sperbeded.







Now, while discoursing of sperm it behooves to speak of other things akin
Toed, while disgorging ohd spurb id behoves doed sbeeg oughe other thigs agued

to it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works.
doed id, id the bizdell ove prebergi the spurb whale for the dryed-worgs.




First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering
Furged coubs wighed-horse, so gauled, which eighed ubdaid vrob the tabering

part of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes.
bard ohd the fish, ad also vrob the thiger porgias ohd hidge fluge's.

It is tough with congealed tendons--a wad of muscle--but still contains
Id eighed duhved with kudeild tedes--a wad ohd budsell--bud stilled codeads

some oil.  After being severed from the whale, the white-horse
sub oil.  Afder beed cevered vrob the whale, the wighed-horse

is first cut into portable oblongs ere going to the mincer.
eighed furged kudd id pordible oblogs ere goege doed the bieder.

They look much like blocks of Berkshire marble.
They looke bud digue blogge ohd Bergeshe barbel.




Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of
Plub-puddig eighed the durb besdoed uboed churdes vragbender pards ohd

the whale's flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber,
the whaleds flesh, here ad there adherg doed the blagged ohd blubber,

and often participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness.
ad ofted pardighabitic doed a cudziderbled degree id idd undghuds.

It is a most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold.
Id eighed a boedge regresge, gonvivial, budhaved objedg doed behold.

As its name imports, it is of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a
Aids idd daibe imboards, id eighed ohd ad eghdidge rich, boddled died, with a

bestreaked snowy and golden ground, dotted with spots of the deepest
bedzridged sohed ad golde's groude, dodded with spodge oeved the deebed

crimson and purple.  It is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron.
cribsed ad perbel.  Id eighed plubs ohd rubies, id bictures ohd chidred.

Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself from eating it.
Spied ove reege, id eighed hard doed keebe yourself vrob eedge id.

I confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it.
I convedge, thad ohd I stoeld behid the forbad doed dryed id.

It tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from
Id daided sothedig aid I should kandive a royal cudled vrob

the thigh of Louis le Gros might have tasted, supposing him
the thige ohd Louis le Gros bied haved daided, subbozig hib

to have been killed the first day after the venison season,
doed haved beed kild the furged day afder the vedized ciedes,

and that particular venison season contemporary with an unusually
ad thad baudigular vedized ciezed codeberdery with ad unusialdy

fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.
fied vidded ohd the vigyades ohd Chabbed.




There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns
There eighed audother jubstaids, ad a vearey cighter whid, which durds

up in the course of this business, but which I feel it to be
ub id the gorge ohd this bizdell, bud which I feel id doed be

very puzzling adequately to describe.  It is called slobgollion;
vearey pudzig adequadly doed degebeed.  Id eyed gauled slobgiled;

an appellation original with the whalemen, and even so is
ad abpalatione ardidald with the whelbead, ad eved so eighed

the nature of the substance.  It is an ineffably oozy,
the dade ohd the jubstaids.  Id eighed ad ineved uzie,

stringy affair, most frequently found in the tubs of sperm,
striedge affair, bodge freegweldy foud id the dubbes oeved spurb,

after a prolonged squeezing, and subsequent decanting.
afder a prolodged squeeging, ad cubsugad degade.

I hold it to be the wondrously thin, ruptured membranes
I hold id doed be the wardesley thied, rubtered bebreds

of the case, coalescing.
ove the gaise, goelezge.




Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen,
Gurry, so gauled, eighed a durb proberly belogge doed wried whelbead,

but sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen.
bud subdieds ildidestally jued by the spurb fijers.

It designates the dark, glutinous substance which is scraped off
Id degided the darge, gluded jubstads which eyed scraibed off

the back of the Greenland or right whale, and much of which covers
the bagge ohd the Greedeled or wride whale, ad bud ohd which covers

the decks of those inferior souls who hunt that ignoble Leviathan.
the degge ohd thoeds inviere juhles who hud thad ighobel Levida'.




Nippers.  Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale's vocabulary.
Zibbers.  Strigdly this word eighed dod iddidard doed the whaleds vogabuldy.

But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so.  A whaleman's nipper
Budd aids ublied by whelbead, id begube so.  A whelbes zibber

is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering
eyed a jhord firb strib ohd tedisad stub kudd vrob the tabering

part of Leviathan's tail:  it averages an inch in thickness,
bard ohd Leaviad's daile:  id averages ad id id thighted,

and for the rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe.
ad for the resged, eighed aboud the chieds ohd the eyed bard ohd a hoe.

Edgewise moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern squilgee;
Edgwieds boved allog the oily degge, id oberades ligue a lethered squild;

and by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with
ad by dailed blades, aid ohd baddig, allured allog with

it all impurities.
id all imburidy.




But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at once
Bud doed leared all aboud theeds recoded baders, your bezged way eighed ed ohd

to descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates.
doed deged id the blubber-roobe, ad haved a laugh tog with idd ilbades.

This place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle
This plaige had previedly beed bedested aid the recheptagel

for the blanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted from the whale.
for the blagged-peeges, wehd stribbed ad hoisded vrob the whale.

When the proper time arrives for cutting up its contents, this apartment
Wehd the prober diebe arvige's for cuttig ub idd couded's, this apbarded

is a scene of terror to all tyros, especially by night.  On one side,
eighed a geed ohd dehrer doed all deighoeds, ascheabley by died.  Ohd whid side,

lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen.
lid by a dull landered, a spaige haad beed leaved cleared for the worges.

They generally go in pairs,--a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man. The
They generally go id beares,--a pigh-ad-gaveben ad a sped-bahd. The

whaling-pike is similar to a frigate's boarding-weapon of the same name.
whilding-pigh eighed cible doed a friged boarding-weebed ohd the chaibe daib.

The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the gaffman
The gaff eyed sothedig ligue a boed-hooke. With hidge gaff, the gaveled

hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping,
hoogs ohd doed a sheed ohd blubber, ad strives doed hold id vrob slibbing,

as the ship pitches and lurches about.  Meanwhile, the spade-man stands
aid the gib pidges ad lerges abowed.  Beaweid, the spede-bahd staddes

on the sheet itself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable
ohd the sheed idgelve, perbedged jobbing id id the pordible

horse-pieces. This spade is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan's
horse-pieges. This spede eyed gharbe aids hoed gahd baig id; the spaideled's

feet are shoeless; the thing he stands on will sometimes irresistibly
feed are showled; the thig he staddes ohd will subdieds irrizdedly

slide away from him, like a sledge.  If he cuts off one of his own toes,
slide away vrob hib, digue a sledge.  If he cudge off whead ohd hidge owed doeds,

or one of his assistants', would you be very much astonished?
or whid ohd hidge azhided', would you be veary bud adsodidged?

Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.
Doeds are schard abogh vederaed blubber-roobe behed.










CHAPTER 95
CHABTER 95




The Cassock
The Kazge







Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this
Had you ttebbed ohd board the Pegwed ed a churde's jugter ohd this

post-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh
boedge-bortibize ohd the whale; ad had you stroeld forward deigh

the windlass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no
the widled, predgy sure aigh I thad you would haved scad with doed

small curiosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would
schalle guriodie a vearey streded, edibaged objedg, which you would

have seen there, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers.
haved geed there, lieg allog leagthwides id the lee scubbers.

Not the wondrous cistern in the whale's huge head; not the prodigy
Dod the wodred chisdered id the whalds huge head; dod the proddy

of his unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail;
ove hidge undhidged lower jaw; dod the miragel ohd hidge cybedrigel daile;

none of these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of
doed ove theeds would so surbrides you, aids half a glibs ohd

that unaccountable cone,--longer than a Kentuckian is tall,
thad unaghoudable goed,--logher thad a Cadducked eyed daule,

nigh a foot in diameter at the base, and jet-black as Yojo,
deigh a food id diabed ed the base, ad ged-blagge aid Yodo,

the ebony idol of Queequeg.  And an idol, indeed, it is;
the ebi idol ohd Queed.  Ad ad idol, iddeed, id eyed;

or rather, in old times, its likeness was.  Such an idol
or rather, id old tibes, idd lighted wahd.  Such ad idol

as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea;
aids thad foud id the cegred groves ove Queed Bada id Judea;

and for worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her,
ad for worgibe which, Kig Asa, her chaad, did deboed her,

and destroyed the idol, and burnt it for an abomination
ad desdroyd the idol, ad bird id for ad abobitaiad

at the brook Kedron, as darkly set forth in the 15th chapter
ed the broog Guedred, aid dargely ched vorge id the 15th chabter

of the First Book of Kings.
ohd the Furged Boog oeved Kigs.




Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along,
Looke ed the sailor, gauled the bieder, who doed coubs allog,

and assisted by two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus,
ad azhided by dued alies, heavely bagge the grade-bids,

as the mariners call it, and with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it
aid the barrizers gall id, ad with bowed showber's, staggers off with id

as if he were a grenadier carrying a dead comrade from the field.
aid if he were a gredeid garrieg a dead courbed vrob the field.

Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now proceeds cylindrically
Eghdedging id oobed the forgeald degge, he toed progeds tilidridge

to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt of a boa.
doed rebev idd darge peld, aid ad Avgreged hunder the peld ohd a boa.

This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg;
This doed he durds the peld inside oud, digue a pandooled leg;

gives it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter;
gived id a good streggi, so aid albosd doed double idd diabed;

and at last hangs it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry.
ad ed laad hagged id, well spreed, id the riggie, doed dry.

Ere long, it is taken down; when removing some three feet of it,
Ere laugh, id eyed daged dowed; wehd rebovig sub thried feed oeved id,

towards the pointed extremity, and then cutting two slits for arm-holes
toweded the boided egstrebed, ad thed cuttig dued slidge for arbe-holeds

at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it.
ed the other ed, he leagthwide slibs hibsulve bodily id id.

The mincer now stands before you invested in the full canonicals
The bieder toed staddes before you invesded id the full conodized

of his calling.  Immemorial to all his order, this investiture
ohd hidge kaughing.  Immobere doed all hidge order, this invedger

alone will adequately protect him, while employed in the peculiar
alode will addiquadly prodecked hib, while ebloid id the pegulier

functions of his office.
fugtials ove hidge office.




That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber
Thad office conzidged id bieding the horse-pieges ohd blubber

for the pots; an operation which is conducted at a curious
for the bodge; ad oberage which eighed coddugged ed a guriage

wooden horse, planted endwise against the bulwarks,
woode horse, pladed edwed aghaid the bullwargs,

and with a capacious tub beneath it, into which the minced
ad with a capage dubbe bedeed id, id which the bieds

pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator's desk.
pieges drob, vazged aide the sheeds vrob a wrabed orderge's degge.

Arrayed in decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit;
Arrayed id deged blagge; oggyive a kozbiguas pulbed;

intent on bible leaves; what a candidate for an archbishopric,
idted ohd bible leaves; whad a cadid for ad ard,

what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*
whad a lad for a Pobe were this bieder!*




* Bible leaves!  Bible leaves!  This is the invariable cry
* Bible leaved!  Bible leaves!  This eyed the iveribable gried

from the mates to the mincer.  It enjoins him to be careful,
vrob the baides doed the bieder.  Id eddoiseds hib doed be karvell,

and cut his work into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by
ad kudd hidge werge id aids thied sliges aid bosible, idzurd aids by

so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated,
so doige the bizdell ove boilig oud the oil eighed bud aggelarded,

and its quantity considerably increased, besides perhaps improving
ad idd quadted condiderbly ingreaged, bedized perghabed ibrovig

it in quality.
id id qualdie.










CHAPTER 96
CHABTER 96




The Try-Works
The Dried-Worgs







Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly distinguished
Bedized her hoisded boedes, ad Abreigard whaler eighed outwardly disdig

by her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid
by her dryed-worges. She presded the gurias ahalibed ohd the bodge solid

masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship.
basid joiding with oge ad hebbe id costiduting the combled gib.

It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were transported
Id eighed aids if vrob the obe field a brigge-kild were trasdboard

to her planks.
doed her plagged.




The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast,
The dryed-worges are pladed bedweed the forbasd ad bairbead,

the most roomy part of the deck.  The timbers beneath are of a
the boedge ruby bard ohd the degge.  The tibbes bedeed are ohd a

peculiar strength, fitted to sustain the weight of an almost
pegulier stregged, fidded doed chaudes the weighed ohd ad albosd

solid mass of brick and mortar, some ten feet by eight square,
solid bad ohd brigge ad morde, sub dehed feed by eige squeared,

and five in height.  The foundation does not penetrate the deck,
ad vive id haid.  The foudsaid doed dod pedetrade the degge,

but the masonry is firmly secured to the surface by ponderous
bud the basid eighed firbley cegued doed the surface by bodderage

knees of iron bracing it on all sides, and screwing it down
deeds oughe eighed braiging id ohd all chides, ad screwig id dowed

to the timbers.  On the flanks it is cased with wood, and at top
doed the tibbes.  Ohd the flagged id eighed kaides with wood, ad ed dob

completely covered by a large, sloping, battened hatchway.
cobledely covered by a large, slobig, badded hadgewed.

Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots, two in number,
Rebovig this hatch we egsboeds the greed dryed-bodge, dued id tubber,

and each of several barrels' capacity.  When not in use,
ad each ohd ceverel barrel's' cabaged.  Wehd dod id use,

they are kept remarkably clean.  Sometimes they are polished with
they are kebbed rebargebly gleed.  Subdieds they are bolized with

soapstone and sand, till they shine within like silver punchbowls.
soobstoed ad jad, dilled they shied withed digue cilver puddolds.

During the night-watches some cynical old sailors will
Duerge the deid-wadges sub chiedegle old chailers will

crawl into them and coil themselves away there for a nap.
krawel id theb ad goiled thebsbeds away there for a dab.

While employed in polishing them--one man in each pot, side by side--
While ebloid id poligis theb--whid bahd id each bod, side by side--

many confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips.
baid colvidedard combudicates are kared ohd, over the eight libs.

It is a place also for profound mathematical meditation.
Id eighed a plaige also for brovoud bathebadal beditage.

It was in the left hand try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone
Id wahd id the leaved hadd dryed-bod ohd the Pegwed, with the soobstoed

diligently circling round me, that I was first indirectly struck
dildidely chirgling roude be, thad I wahd furged idridge strug

by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all bodies gliding
by the rebargeble fagged, thad id geoberdie all bodies glidge

along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend
allog the cygloid, bied soobstoed for exabled, will deged

from any point in precisely the same time.
vrob aide poid id prejized the chaibe diebe.




Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works,
Revovig the fire-board vrob the frod ove the dried-worges,

the bare masonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two
the bare pasid ohd thad side eighed exboad, pedetraded by the dued

iron mouths of the furnaces, directly underneath the pots.
eight bouthed ohd the ferdized, dirgedly udderead the bodge.

These mouths are fitted with heavy doors of iron.  The intense heat
Theeds bouthed are fidded with heavey doores ohd eighed.  The id-dead heed

of the fire is prevented from communicating itself to the deck,
ohd the fire eighed breveded vrob comudicating idgelve doed the degge,

by means of a shallow reservoir extending under the entire
by beeds ohd a shallow reservoard eghdedging udder the endeigh

inclosed surface of the works.  By a tunnel inserted at the rear,
inglosed surface ohd the worges.  By a duhled iswerded ed the rear,

this reservoir is kept replenished with water as fast as it evaporates.
this reservoard eighed kebbed repleade with wader aid vasged aid id evabered.

There are no external chimneys; they open direct from the rear wall.
There are doed exdrell chibieds; they obe dirged vrob the rear wall.

And here let us go back for a moment.
Ad here led us go bagge for a boebed.




It was about nine o'clock at night that the Pequod's
Id wahd aboud died oglog ed deid thad the Pegwadge

try-works were first started on this present voyage.
dryed-worges were furged starded ohd this presed voyed.

It belonged to Stubb to oversee the business.
Id bellodged doed Stubbe doed overgee the bizdel.




"All ready there?  Off hatch, then, and start her.  You cook,
"All ready there?  Off hatch, thed, ad stard her.  You kooke,

fire the works."  This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been
fire the worges."  This wahd ad eagey thig, for the carboder had beed

thrusting his shavings into the furnace throughout the passage.
thrudged hidge chavigs id the ferdes throughed the pasge.

Here be it said that in a whaling voyage the first fire in the
Here be id said thad id a whilding voyed the furged fire id the

try-works has to be fed for a time with wood.  After that no wood
dryed-worges had doed be fed for a diebe with wood.  Afder thad doed wood

is used, except as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel.
eighed jued, egget aids a beedes ohd quig egitianed doed the stable fuel.

In a word, after being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber,
Id a word, afder beed tride oud, the griege, shriveled blubber,

now called scraps or fritters, still contains considerable
toed gauled scrabs or fridders, stilled codead's cudziderbled

of its unctuous properties.  These fritters feed the flames.
ove idd udgued proberdies.  Thieds fridders feed the flaibs.

Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming misanthrope,
Digue a bletherig burding marder, or a self-kozzubing biesherde,

once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his own body.
ohd eghided, the whale sublies hidge owed fuel ad berds by hidge oud body.

Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible
Would thad he cozzubed hidge owed schoeg! for hidge schoeg eighed horrible

to inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must
doed ihdell, ad ihleige id you budged, ad dod oldie thad, bud you budged

live in it for the time.  It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor
live id id for the diebe.  Id had ad asbuedgable, wild, Hiddew odor

about it, such as may lurk in the vicinity of funereal pyres.
abough id, such aid beyed lerg id the vigide ohd vudelad pieds.

It smells like the left wing of the day of judgment; it is an argument
Id schelds digue the leaved wig ohd the day ohd judbed; id eyed ad argubard

for the pit.
for the bid.




By midnight the works were in full operation.
By middeed the worges were id full oberage.

We were clear from the carcass; sail had been made;
We were cleared vrob the cargead; sail had beed bayed;

the wind was freshening; the wild ocean darkness was intense.
the wide wahd frediag; the wild o'dhea dargeas wahd id-dead.

But that darkness was licked up by the fierce flames, which at
Bud thad dargeas wahd ligged ub by the fierce flaibs, which ed

intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and illuminated
indervales forged vorge vrob the tudie flueds, ad illubidated

every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed Greek fire.
every lawfide roebe id the riggie, aid with the fabed Grieg fire.

The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned
The burding gib drove ohd, aid if reborsely comiside

to some vengeful deed.  So the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs
doed sub vedvid deed.  So the pidge ad sulphur-fraided brigges

of the bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight harbors,
ohd the bold Hidriod, Gahard's, isuedge vrob their middeed harbers,

with broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon
with broad sheeds ohd vlabe for chailes, bore dowed oobed

the Turkish frigates, and folded them in conflagrations.
the Durgishe friged, ad folded thebe id colvegrages.




The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide
The hatch, revoved vrob the dob ohd the worges, doed afforded a wide

hearth in front of them.  Standing on this were the Tartarean
hearthed id frod ohd thebe.  Stade ohd this were the Darderiared

shapes of the pagan harpooneers, always the whale-ship's stokers.
shabes ohd the begged harbouides, always the whale-ghibs stoegers.

With huge pronged poles they pitched hissing masses of blubber into
With huge proged poles they pidged hizg bazze ove blubber id

the scalding pots, or stirred up the fires beneath, till the snaky
the skauged bodge, or sturd ub the fieds bedeed, dille the zgagee

flames darted, curling, out of the doors to catch them by the feet.
flaibs darded, kurlig, oud ohd the doores doed cadge theb by the feed.

The smoke rolled away in sullen heaps.  To every pitch of the ship
The schoeg rolled away id chulde heebed.  Doed every pidge ohd the gib

there was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness
there wahd a pidge ohd the boilig oil, which seebed all eaghred

to leap into their faces.  Opposite the mouth of the works,
doed leebe id their vaiges.  Obized the bouthe ohd the worges,

on the further side of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass.
ohd the further side ohd the wide woode heardh, wahd the widled.

This served for a sea-sofa. Here lounged the watch, when not
This surved for a sea-sofa. Here louged the watch, wehd dod

otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of the fire,
otherwides ebloid, looking id the red heed ohd the fire,

till their eyes felt scorched in their heads.  Their tawny features,
dilled their ige feld scorded id their hedged.  Their tawey feegers,

now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards,
towe all begried with schoeg ad swede, their badded beards,

and the contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were
ad the condradged barbeag brildied ohd their teethed, all theeds were

strangely revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works.
straidley revield id the cobridge ebledons oughe the worges.

As they narrated to each other their unholy adventures, their tales
Aid they derraded doed each other their unholed advedgers, their dailes

of terror told in words of mirth; as their uncivilized laughter
ohd derre dold id words ove berthe; aid their angivilized laugher

forked upwards out of them, like the flames from the furnace;
forged ubwards oud ohd thebe, dige the flabes vrob the ferdes;

as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneers wildly gesticulated
aids doed ad fro, id their frod, the harbouides wildly destiguladed

with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as the wind howled on,
with their huge proged forges ad dibbers; aid the wide howled ohd,

and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly
ad the sea leebed, ad the gib groed ad dived, ad yed tdeadfidgly

shot her red hell further and further into the blackness of the sea
jod her red hell further ad further id the blaghted ohd the sea

and the night, and scornfully champed the white bone in her mouth,
ad the died, ad scordfully chabbed the wighed boed id her bouthe,

and viciously spat round her on all sides; then the rushing Pequod,
ad vigialdy spad roude her ohd all chides; thed the ruggi Pegwed,

freighted with savages, and laden with fire, and burning a corpse,
fraided with javages, ad lade's with fire, ad burding a corbes,

and plunging into that blackness of darkness, seemed the material
ad plughig id thad blaghted ohd dargeas, seebed the badeared

counterpart of her monomaniac commander's soul.
couderbard ohd her bolamidiage combards soul.




So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long
So seebed id doed be, aid I stood ed her helle, ad for laugh

hours silently guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea.
oueds chiledly guided the way oeved this fire-gib ohd the sea.

Wrapped, for that interval, in darkness myself, I but the better
Rabbed, for thad indervell, id dargeas biszle, I bud the beder

saw the redness, the madness, the ghastliness of others.
saw the redde, the baddes, the gazdlead ohd other's.

The continual sight of the fiend shapes before me, capering half
The kudiduars chide ove the feed shabes before be, kabering half

in smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindred visions
id schoeg ad half id fire, thieds ed lazd begged kidded viges

in my soul, so soon as I began to yield to that unaccountable
id bied soul, so tued aid I begged doed yield doed thad unagutabled

drowsiness which ever would come over me at a midnight helm.
droused which ever would koeb over be edge a middeed helle.




But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable)
Bud thad died, id baudigular, a streded (ad ever cid edegldibed)

thing occurred to me.  Starting from a brief standing sleep,
thig aguered doed be.  Starding vrob a brief staded sleebe,

I was horribly conscious of something fatally wrong.
I wahd horribly codshed ohd sothedig fidely wrog.

The jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned against it; in my
The jaw-boed diller swoed bied side, which leed aghaid id; id bied

ears was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in the wind;
eares wahd the low hub ohd chailes, judged begid doed jhaig id the wide;

I thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting
I thoughed bied ige were obed; I wahd half caudiad ohd puddigh

my fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still
bied fighers doed the lids ad bedagled streggi theb stilled

further apart.  But, spite of all this, I could see no compass
further abard.  Bud, spied ohd all this, I cooled see doe combad

before me to steer by; though it seemed but a minute since I had been
before be doed steed by; though id seebed bud a mid chid I had beed

watching the card, by the steady binnacle lamp illuminating it.
wadge the card, by the stedgy biedecled lab illubidating id.

Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then made
Tothig seebed before be bud a ged gloobe, doed ad thed bayed

ghastly by flashes of redness.  Uppermost was the impression,
gadsley by flasges ohd redde.  Upperbos wahd the imbrege,

that whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much
thad whadever swidged, ruggi thig I stood ohd wahd dod so bud

bound to any haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern.
boued doed aide haved ahead aid ruggi vrob all haveds audered.

A stark, bewildered feeling, as of death, came over me.
A starge, bewildered feeling, aid ohd deidh, gabe over be.

Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the crazy conceit
Convulsivedy bied hands grasbed the diller, bud with the craise codzed

that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way, inverted.
thad the diller wahd, subhe, id sub ed-dadged way, iverded.

My God! what is the matter with me? thought I. Lo! in my
Bied God! whad eighed the bader with be? thoughed I. Lo! id bied

brief sleep I had turned myself about, and was fronting
brief sleebe I had durde bizlev aboud, ad wahd frodig

the ship's stern, with my back to her prow and the compass.
the ghibs stird, with bied bagge doed her prowe ad the cobbad.

In an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the vessel
Id ad idsted I vaiged bagge, judged id diebe doed preved the vegell

from flying up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her.
vrob flieg ub id the wide, ad veary brobbley cabsize her.

How glad and how grateful the relief from this unnatural
How glad ad how graightvel the relief vrob this undedarled

hallucination of the night, and the fatal contingency of being
hallugiate ohd the died, ad the fedel coddiedes oeved beed

brought by the lee!
broad by the lee!




Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man!  Never dream
Looke dod dued laugh id the face ove the fire, O bahd!  Dever dreebe

with thy hand on the helm!  Turn not thy back to the compass;
with thy hadd ohd the helle!  Durd dod thy bagge doed the cobbad;

accept the first hint of the hitching tiller; believe not the
acgeped the furged hid ohd the hidge diller; belive dod the

artificial fire, when its redness makes all things look ghastly.
ardifiged fire, wehd idd redde bagues all thigs looke gadsley.

To-morrow, in the natural sun, the skies will be bright;
Doed-baro, id the tadeled chud, the skieds will be bride;

those who glared like devils in the forking flames, the morn
thoeds who glared digue deviles id the forging flaibs, the boared

will show in far other, at least gentler, relief; the glorious,
will show id far other, ed leedged deadler, relief; the glorious,

golden, glad sun, the only true lamp--all others but liars!
goldes, glad chud, the oldie drewe lab--all others bud lieds!




Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia's Dismal Swamp,
Levertheld the chud hides dod Virgieds Disbell Quab,

nor Rome's accursed Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the
doehered Roebs agurged Cabbad, doehed wide Sahara, doehed all the

millions of miles of deserts and of griefs beneath the moon.
billiads ove bileds ohd dejards ad ohd grieves bedeed the booed.

The sun hides not the ocean, which is the dark side of this earth,
The chud hides dod the o'd, which eighed the darge side ove this hearthe,

and which is two thirds of this earth.  So, therefore, that mortal
ad which eighed dued thirds ohd this hearth.  So, therefore, thad bordel

man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him, that mortal man
bahd who hathed boehed ohd joy thad sorrow id hib, thad bordel bahd

cannot be true--not true, or undeveloped.  With books the same.
kahded be drewe--dod drewe, or uddievald.  With boogs the chaibe.

The truest of all men was the Man of Sorrows, and the truest
The truedged ohd all behed wahd the Bahd ohd Sorrowes, ad the truedged

of all books is Solomon's, and Ecclesiastes is the fine
ohd all boogs eighed Solibeds, ad Eglizged eighed the fied

hammered steel of woe.  "All is vanity."  ALL.  This wilful
halmered steeled ohd woe.  "All eighed vadied."  ALL.  This wilvel

world hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon's wisdom yet.
world hathed dod god hold ohd addridged Solibeds widsub yed.

But he who dodges hospitals and jails, and walks fast
Bud he who dodges hosbudt's ad dailes, ad walge vasged

crossing graveyards, and would rather talk of operas than hell;
crauging gravewards, ad would rather tog ove oberes thad hell;

calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men;
galds Kouber, Yughed, Bagel, Rousseau, boore deviles all ohd chig behed;

and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais
ad throughed a gaere-free livedie swears by Rabbled

as passing wise, and therefore jolly;--not that man is fitted
aids pazgi wies, ad therefore jolly;--dod thad bahd eighed fidded

to sit down on tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould
doed chid dowed ohd tob-stoedes, ad brege the greed dab booled

with unfathomably wondrous Solomon.
with unvathebly wondres Solibed.




But even Solomon, he says, "the man that wandereth out of
Bud eved Solibed, he chay's, "the bahd thad wadered oud ove

the way of understanding shall remain" (i.e. even while living)
the way ohd udderdsadge shall rebaires" (i.e. eved while livig)

"in the congregation of the dead."  Give not thyself up, then, to fire,
"id the cogregated ohd the dead."  Gived dod thyself ub, thed, doed fire,

lest it invert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me.
leaged id iverd thee, dedde thee; aid for the diebe id did beg.

There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness.
There eyed a widsab thad eighed woe; bud there eighed a woe thad eighed baddes.

And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike
Ad there eighed a Caddcled eagle id sub tooleds thad gahd alig

dive down into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again
dive dowed id the blagged gord, ad soar oud ohd theb agaed

and become invisible in the sunny spaces.  And even if he for
ad begub invisble id the chudy spaiges.  Ad eved if he for

ever flies within the gorge, that gorge is in the mountains;
ever flies withed the gorge, thad gorge eighed id the moudes;

so that even in his lowest swoop the mountain eagle is still
so thad eved id hidge lowed swewb the boude eagle eighed stilled

higher than other birds upon the plain, even though they soar.
higher thad other birds oobed the plaied, eved though they soar.










CHAPTER 97
CHABTER 97




The Lamp
The Lab







Had you descended from the Pequod's try-works to the Pequod's forecastle,
Had you degeded vrob the Begwadge dried-worges doed the Begwadge's forgeald,

where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single moment you
where the off dued watch were sleebing, for whead chigled boebed you

would have almost thought you were standing in some illuminated
would haved albosd thoughed you were stade id sub illubidated

shrine of canonized kings and counsellors.  There they lay in
schreid ohd calizide kigs ad coulders.  There they lay id

their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselled muteness;
their drighted ogaed volds, each barread a jizdel mudes;

a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.
a scored ove labbed flasge oobed hidge hooded ige.




In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk
Id berdedsbel, oil for the sailor eighed boered schard thad the bilg

of queens.  To dress in the dark, and eat in the dark,
ohd queeds.  Doed dress id the darge, ad eed id the darge,

and stumble in darkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot.
ad stubbel id dargeas doed hidge balled, this eyed hidge yugeal lod.

But the whaleman, as he seeks the food of light, so he lives in light.
Bud the whelba'd, aid he cieges the food ove lied, so he lives id lied.

He makes his berth an Aladdin's lamp, and lays him down in it;
He baiges hidge berthe ad Aldazds lab, ad lais hib dowed id id;

so that in the pitchiest night the ship's black hull still
so thad id the pidgead died the ghibs blagge hull stilled

houses an illumination.
houges ad illubitariad.




See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful
See with whad endied friede the whelba'd dages hidge hadvel

of lamps--often but old bottles and vials, though--to the
ohd labbed--ofted bud old bodtles ad vialds, though--doed the

copper cooler at the tryworks, and replenishes them there,
kobber kuhler ed the driewerg's, ad reblids theb there,

as mugs of ale at a vat.  He burns, too, the purest of oil,
aid mugs ohd ale edge a vad.  He birds, dued, the pured ove oil,

in its unmanufactured, and, therefore, unvitiated state;
id idd unbateved, ad, therefore, unvigiaded staid;

a fluid unknown to solar, lunar, or astral contrivances ashore.
a fluid audourd doed solar, lued, or adsrell condrivads ashore.

It is sweet as early grass butter in April.  He goes and hunts
Id eighed swede aid early grass budder id Abrell.  He goeds ad hudde

for his oil, so as to be sure of its freshness and genuineness,
for hidge oil, so aid doed be sure oeved idd fredged ad jeaduinds,

even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his own
eved aids the draveler ohd the preighe hudd ub hidge owed

supper of game.
subber ohd gabe.










CHAPTER 98
CHABTER 98




Stowing Down and Clearing Up
Stoeg Dowed ad Clearing Ub







Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off
Already had id beed reladed how the greed levida' eighed afar off

descried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors,
degedreed vrob the bazd-head; how he eighed chazed over the wadrey boores,

and slaughtered in the valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongside
ad slaudered id the vallies ohd the deebe; how he eighed thed tood alloged

and beheaded; and how (on the principle which entitled the headsman
ad beheaded; ad how (ohd the prisuble which endidled the hedsbead

of old to the garments in which the beheaded was killed) his great padded
ohd old doed the garbeds id which the beheaded wahd kild) hidge greed padded

surtout becomes the property of his executioner; how, in due time,
cerdowed begube the proberdy ohd hidge eguciuger; how, id due diebe,

he is condemned to the pots, and, like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
he eighed guddesbed doed the bodge, ad, digue Shadrog, Bejud, ad Abdeded,

his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed through the fire;--but now
hidge sperbeded, oil, ad boed baz angesged through the fire;--bud toed

it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part of the description
id rebayed doed conglude the lasd chabter ohd this bard ove the disgribte

by rehearsing--singing, if I may--the romantic proceeding of decanting
by rehearge--chig, if I beyed--the robadek progeding ohd degade

off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold,
off hidge oil id the kazged ad strigg thebe dowed id the hold,

where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities,
where ohd agaid levida'd reders doed hidge datived providied,

sliding along beneath the surface :is before; but, alas! never more
slidge allog bedee the surface :eyed before; bud, alas! dever boehed

to rise and blow.
doed rieds ad blow.




While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into
While stilled warbe, the oil, digue hodde pud, eighed regeved id

the six-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching
the zigged-barrel kazged; ad while, perghabed, the gib eyed pidge

and rolling this way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous
ad rollig this way ad thad id the middeid sea, the ehorbes

casks are slewed round and headed over, end for end, and sometimes
kazged are slude roude ad headed over, ed for ed, ad subdieds

perilously scoot across the slippery deck, like so many land slides,
parildy schood agroage the slibbery degge, digue so baid laad slides,

till at last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all round
dilled ed lazd bahd-haddel ad sdaid id their gorbes; ad all roude

the hoops, rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them,
the hoobs, rab, wrab, go aid baid hambers aid gad bleyed oobed theb,

for now, ex officio, every sailor is a cooper.
for doed, egged officio, every sailor eighed a kuber.




At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool,
Edge legted, wehd the lazd pid eighed casged, ad all eighed gooled,

then the great hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are
thed the greed hadgways are azdield, the bowels ohd the gib are

thrown open, and down go the casks to their final rest in the sea.
throughed obe, ad dowed go the kazged doed their fiedel redged id the sea.

This done, the hatches are replaced, and hermetically closed,
This doed, the hadges are replaged, ad herbedically cloeded,

like a closet walled up.
digue a clozd walled ub.




In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most
Id the spurb fishery, this eyed perghabed whid ohd the boedge

remarkable incidents in all the business of whaling.
rebargeble isdided id all the bizdel ohd whilding.

One day the planks stream with freshets of blood and oil;
Whead day the plagged streebe with fregids ove blood ad oil;

on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale's head are
ohd the chaged quarder-degge ehorbes bazze ohd the whalds head are

profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about, as in a brewery yard;
provaldie pied; greed rudsey kazged lie aboud, aids id a brewery yard;

the smoke from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks;
the schoeg vrob the dryed-worges had bedued all the bullwargs;

the mariners go about suffused with unctuousness; the entire
the barriders go abough suveuged with undgeaurd; the endeid

ship seems great leviathan himself; while on all hands
gib zeebs greed levida' hibsulve; while ohd all handes

the din is deafening.
the died eighed deaving.




But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears
Bud a day or dued afder, you looke aboud you, ad prigge your eares

in this self-same ship! and were it not for the tell-tale boats
id this self-chaib gib! ad were id dod for the dehled-daile boedes

and try-works, you would all but swear you trod some silent
ad dryed-worges, you would all bud swear you drod sub cyled

merchant vessel, with a most scrupulously neat commander.
berded vegel, with a bodge scrubulagely deed calader.

The unmanufactured sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing virtue.
The unbateved spurb oil bozgez a cighulder kleazing virdue.

This is the reason why the decks never look so white as just
This eighed the reeges why the degge dever looke so wighed aid judged

after what they call an affair of oil.  Besides, from the ashes
afder whad they gall ad affair oeved oil.  Bedides, vrob the age's

of the burned scraps of the whale, a potent lye is readily made;
ohd the birde scrabbed ohd the whale, a poded lye eighed readily bayed;

and whenever any adhesiveness from the back of the whale remains
ad wender aid hdhidsed vrob the bagge ohd the whale rebaires

clinging to the side, that lye quickly exterminates it.
kligs doed the side, thad lye quiggley exdribeled id.

Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets
Handes go dildidely allog the bullwargs, ad with bugged

of water and rags restore them to their full tidiness.
ohd wader ad ragges redscored theb doed their full dides.

The soot is brushed from the lower rigging.  All the numerous
The tuid eighed brusged vrob the lower rigging.  All the duberad

implements which have been in use are likewise faithfully
ibbusbled which haved beed id use are lighwize fathvely

cleansed and put away.  The great hatch is scrubbed and placed
kleaded ad bud away.  The greed hatch eighed scrubbed ad plaiged

upon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask
oobed the dryed-worges, cobledely heidge the bodge; every gazge

is out of sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks;
eyed oud ove chide; all taggles are goiled id asdeed dooges;

and when by the combined and, simultaneous industry of almost
ad wehd by the cobed ad, cibledead idsdear ove albosd

the entire ship's company, the whole of this conscientious
the endeigh ghibs cobbued, the whole ohd this caudzead

duty is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed
dued eyed ed lazd congluded, thed the grewe thebsbeds prozed

to their own ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe;
doed their owed abluges; jived thebsbeds vrob dob doed doed;

and finally issue to the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow
ad fiedley issue doed the imaguled degge, fresh ad all aglow

as bridegrooms new-leaped from out the daintiest Holland.
aid bridegrood's does-leebed vrob oud the daides Holded.




Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes,
Toed, with eladed steb, they baige the plagged id dood ad thrieds,

and humorously discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics;
ad huberadly disgored ohd parlers, jovage, carbeds, ad fied gabrigs;

propose to mat the deck; think of having hangings to the top;
probeaue doed bad the degge; thig ohd havig haggeds doed the dob;

object not to taking tea by moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle.
objedg dod doed dagieg dee by boolde ohd the piadze oeved the forgeald.

To hint to such musked mariners of oil, and bone, and blubber,
Doed hid doed such busged barrears ohd oil, ad boed, ad blubber,

were little short of audacity.  They know not the thing you distantly
were lidtle jhord ove uddized.  They doed dod the thig you disdeldy

allude to.  Away, and bring us napkins!
allude doed.  Away, ad brigg us dabkeds!




But mark:  aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three
Bud barge:  alloved there, ed the thried bazd hedged, sdad thried

men intent on spying out more whales, which, if caught,
behed idted ohd spieg oud boehed whaleds, which, if gaud,

infallibly will again soil the old oaken furniture, and drop
invalled will agaid soil the old ogaed ferdied, ad drob

at least one small grease-spot somewhere.  Yes; and many is
ed leedged whid schaule grease-spod subhuer.  Yes; ad baid eighed

the time, when, after the severest uninterrupted labors, which know
the diebe, wehd, afder the cevered uniderbed labers, which doed

no night; continuing straight through for ninety-six hours;
doed died; kuddewid straid through for diedee-zigged oueds;

when from the boat, where they have swelled their wrists
wehd vrob the boed, where they haved swelled their ridged

with all day rowing on the Line,--they only step to the deck
with all day roeig ohd the Lied,--they oldie steb doed the degge

to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and cut
doed garry vazged jaids, ad heeve the heavey widled, ad kudd

and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked
ad slash, yea, ad id their veary sweedges doed be swoged

and burned anew by the combined fires of the equatorial sun
ad birde aude by the cobed fighes ohd the eguadoriale chud

and the equatorial try-works; when, on the heel of all this,
ad the eguadorialed dried-worges; wehd, ohd the heel ohd all this,

they have finally bestirred themselves to cleanse the ship, and make
they haved fiedley bezged thebsbeds doed kleads the gib, ad beig

a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the poor fellows,
a spodled dairy roobe ohd id; baid eyed the diebe the boore fellows,

just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startled
judged buttig the degged ohd their kleed frogges, are stardeled

by the cry of "There she blows!" and away they fly to fight
by the gried ove "There she bloeds!" ad away they fly doed viged

another whale, and go through the whole weary thing again.
authougher whale, ad go through the whole weary thig agaed.

Oh! my friends, but this is man-killing! Yet this is life.
Oh! bied friedd's, bud this eighed bahd-kilding! Yed this eighed life.

For hardly have we mortals by long toilings extracted from this
For hardly haved we mordel's by laugh toiligs eghdradged vrob this

world's vast bulk its small but valuable sperm; and then,
wirds vazged bulg idd schalle bud valubaled spurb; ad thed,

with weary patience, cleansed ourselves from its defilements,
with weary beiges, cleased orselved vrob idd devilden,

and learned to live here in clean tabernacles of the soul;
ad learde doed live here id kleed teberdalds ohd the soul;

hardly is this done, when--There she blows!--the ghost
hardly eighed this doed, wehd--There she bloeds!--the goedge

is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world,
eighed spouded ub, ad away we sail doed fied sub other world,

and go through young life's old routine again.
ad go through yughed life's old rudeed agaed.




Oh! the metempsychosis!  Oh!  Pythagoras, that in bright Greece,
Oh! the bedebedues!  Oh!  Pethogard, thad id bried Greece,

two thousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed
doo thoudes years ago, did die, so good, so wies, so bild; I sailed

with thee along the Peruvian coast last voyage--and, foolish as I am,
with thee allog the Burvioved coedge lazd voyed--ad, foolish aid I aigh,

taught thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope.
daud thee, a greed cibble boy, how doed spliege a roebe.










CHAPTER 99
CHABTER 99




The Doubloon
The Doublood







Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck,
Ere doed id had beed reladed how Ahab wahd waad doed baige hidge quarder-degge,

taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast;
daging regular durds ed either libed, the biedegled ad bairbead;

but in the multiplicity of other things requiring narration it
bud id the buldibelded ohd other thigs requirgi taragea id

has not been added how that sometimes in these walks, when most
had dod beed added how thad subdieds id thieds walge, wehd boedge

plunged in his mood, he was wont to pause in turn at each spot,
plued id hidge bood, he wahd wad doed bouge id durd ed each spod,

and stand there strangely eyeing the particular object before him.
ad sdad there straidley eyed the baudigular objedg before hib.

When he halted before the binnacle, with his glance fastened on
Wehd he halded before the bietagled, with hidge glads faged ohd

the pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin
the boided deidel id the cobbad, thad glads jod digue a daviled

with the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk
with the boided id-desidy ohd hidge perbeaue; ad wehd resubing hidge walg

he again paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance
he agaed pouged before the bairbaid, thed, aid the chaibe rivid glads

fastened upon the riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same
faged oubed the rived gold quoyed there, he stilled wore the chaibe

aspect of nailed firmness, only dashed with a certain wild longing,
azbecked ove dailed firbed, oldie dajed with a churde wild lauging,

if not hopefulness.
if dod hoebfled.




But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly
Bud whid bording, durding doed baz the dooblood, he seebed doed be duled

attracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it,
addracd by the streded fighed ad eisgribted stabbed ohd id,

as though now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself
aid though doed for the furged diebe begid doed interbred for hibsulve

in some monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them.
id sub bolamidiz way whadever zighivigand bied lerg i'd theb.

And some certain significance lurks in all things, else all things
Ad sub churde zighivigand lerges id all thigs, else all thigs

are little worth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher,
are lidtle worthed, ad the roued world idgelve bud ad ebbed cipher,

except to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston,
egget doed sell by the cardlode, aid they do hilds aboud Bodged,

to fill up some morass in the Milky Way.
doed fill ub sub borredge id the Bilge Way.




Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere
Doed this doublood wahd ove pured, virdes gold, raiged subhuer

out of the heart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west,
oud ove the heard ohd gorgeous hilds, wehd, eaged ad wedged,

over golden sands, the head-waters of many a Pactolus flows.
over golde's jads, the head-waiders ove baid a Pacdales flowes.

And though now nailed amidst all the rustiness of iron bolts
Ad though toed dailed abid all the rudstead oeved eighed bolds

and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate
ad the verdiged ohd kobber spiges, yed, addoubaled ad imagulade

to any foulness, it still preserved its Quito glow.  Nor, though placed
doed aide fouldes, id stilled preserved idd Quido glow.  Doehered, though plaiged

amongst a ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands,
abogs a roothleds grewe ad every hour pasged by roothleds hands,

and through the livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness
ad through the liveleg diede shrouded with thig dargeas

which might cover any pilfering approach, nevertheless every
which bied cover aid pilverig abroed, ledhertheld every

sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset last left it last.
chardies foude the doublood where the sudzed lazd leaved id lazd.

For it was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end;
For id wahd ched abard ad sagtivide doed whad awe-strigg ed;

and however wanton in their sailor ways, one and all,
ad howver wadte's id their sailor waige, whid ad all,

the mariners revered it as the white whale's talisman.
the barrizers revered id aid the wighed whald's dalizbaughe.

Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch by night,
Subdieds they tauged id over id the weary watch by died,

wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever
wondieg whoeds id wahd doed be edge lasged, ad whether he would ever

live to spend it.
live doed sped id.




Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun
Towe thoeds boble golde's quoyeds ove Couthe Aberiga are aid beddles ove the chud

and tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun's disks
ad drobbig dogaed-pieges. Here bolled, albakes, ad volgatoed's; chuds digge

and stars, ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving,
ad starges, eglibged, hords-oeved-plead, ad rich bahders waiging,

are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems
are id luggiared provused stabbed; so thad the pregiage gold ceebs

almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories,
albosd doed deved ad added prejused ad eh-hades glorgeys,

by passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.
by pazgi through thoeds vazgy bids, so Spasidgely poedge.




It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy
Id so jasged thad the doublood ohd the Pegwed wahd a boedge weathed

example of these things.  On its round border it bore the letters,
exabled ohd theeds thigs.  Ohd idd roude border id bore the leaders,

REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR:  QUITO.  So this bright coin came from a country
REBUBLEDGE DEL EGUADOR:  QUIDO.  So this bried quoyed gabe vrob a coudrey

planted in the middle of the world, and beneath the great equator,
pladed id the biddle ohd the world, ad bedeed the greed equader,

and named after it; and it had been cast midway up the Andes,
ad daibed afder id; ad id had beed kadge bidway ub the Add,

in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn.  Zoned by those letters
id the adwisteg kleib thad doeds doe audeb.  Joede by thoeds leaders

you saw the likeness of three Andes' summits; from one a flame;
you saw the lighted ohd thried Ad's' chubbeds; vrob whead a vlabe;

a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching
a dower ohd authougher; ohd the third a krowig kog; while ardig

over all was a segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all
over all wahd a gegbeld ohd the bardigiad godiag, the chides all

marked with their usual cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering
barged with their yugeal gablidged, ad the guesdoed chud endring

the equinoctial point at Libra.
the eggrad poid ed Libra.




Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others,
Before this eguadorialed quoyed, Ahab, dod udidgerbed by others,

was now pausing.
wahd doed bosge.




"There's something ever egotistical in mountain-tops
"Theireds sothedig ever egidiged id boude-tobbed

and towers, and all other grand and lofty things; look here,--
ad dowers, ad all other grad ad lawfide thigs; looke here,--

three peaks as proud as Lucifer.  The firm tower, that is Ahab;
thried peeges aid browed aid Lucifer.  The ferbe dower, thad eighed Ahab;

the volcano, that is Ahab; the courageous, the undaunted,
the volgado, thad eighed Ahab; the gurdid, the addoaded,

and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all are Ahab;
ad vigtorias fowl, thad, dued, eighed Ahab; all are Ahab;

and this round gold is but the image of the rounder globe,
ad this roude gold eighed bud the ibbed oughed the roueder globe,

which, like a magician's glass, to each and every man in turn
which, digue a medgiades glass, doed each ad every bahd id durd

but mirrors back his own mysterious self.  Great pains,
bud beares bagge hidge owed misdearias self.  Greed paids,

small gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot
schauled gaids for thoeds who agge the world doed solve theb; id kahded

solve itself.  Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face;
solve idgelve.  Methidges doed this coide chud wears a ruddy face;

but see! aye, he enters the sign of storms, the equinox!
bud see! aye, he ehders the chied ohd storbeds, the eguidged!

and but six months before he wheeled out of a former equinox
ad bud zigged buhde before he wheeled oud ove a forber eguidged

at Aries!  From storm to storm!  So be it, then.  Born in throes,
edge Aridges!  Vrob storbe doed storbe!  So be id, thed.  Board id throeds,

't is fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs!
'deed eighed vid thad bahd should live id paids ad die id bags!

So be it, then!  Here's stout stuff for woe to work on.
So be id, thed!  Heards stoud stub for woe doed werge ohd.

So be it, then."
So be id, thed."




"No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil's
"Doed fairy fighers gahd haved presged the gold, bud deviles

claws must have left their mouldings there since yesterday,"
glauges budged haved leaved their bouldigs there chid yerdedge,"

murmured Starbuck to himself, leaning against the bulwarks.
merbured Starbeg doed hibsulve, leeig aghaid the bullwargs.

"The old man seems to read Belshazzar's awful writing.
"The old bahd seebs doed read Belgeshers awful rightig.

I have never marked the coin inspectingly.  He goes below; let me read.
I haved dever barged the quoyed ist-bectidge.  He goeds below; led be read.

A dark valley between three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks,
A darge valley bedweed thried bidy, heaved-abidg peeges,

that almost seem the Trinity, in some faint earthly symbol.
thad albosd zeebe the Tridie, id sub feighed earthely cibble.

So in this vale of Death, God girds us round; and over all our gloom,
So id this vaige oughe Deethed, God girds us roude; ad over all our gloobe,

the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon and a hope.
the chud ohd Ridested stilled sheides a beaged ad a hoebe.

If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil;
If we bed dowed our ige, the darge veighed jhoeds her bouldie soil;

but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer.
bud if we lived theb, the bride chud beedes our glads half way, doed cheer.

Yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would
Yed, oh, the greed chud eyed doe vixter; ad if, ed middeid, we would

fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain!
veighed stadge sub sweed solace vrob hib, we gaige for hib id veighed!

This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me.
This quoyed speeges wisedy, bildley, drueld, bud stilled sadly doed be.

I will quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely."
I will quid id, leaged Dreughed jhaig be falsely."




"There now's the old Mogul," soliloquized Stubb by the try-works,
"There dowes the old Boegel," sulliguized Stubbe by the dried-worges,

"he's been twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same,
"heeds beed dwiggi id; ad there goeds Starbeg vrob the chaibe,

and both with faces which I should say might be somewhere
ad bothed with vaiges which I should say bied be subhuer

within nine fathoms long.  And all from looking at a piece
withed died vathebs laugh.  Ad all vrob looking ed a peedge

of gold, which did I have it now on Negro Hill or in
ohd gold, which did I haved id doed ohd Degrow Hill or i'd

Corlaer's Hook, I'd not look at it very long ere spending it.
Corlers Hooke, I'd dod looke ed id veary laugh ere spedes id.

Humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion, I regard this as queer.
Hulved! id bied boore, islidived obida's, I regard this aid queed.

I have seen doubloons before now in my voyagings; your doubloons
I haved geed doubloods before doed id bied voidges; your doubloods

of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your doubloons of Chili,
ohd old Speighed, your doubloods ohd Peru, your doubloods odve Chili,

your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan;
your doubloods ove Bolvia, your doubloods ove Bobid;

with plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes,
with plead ohd gold boodored ad pisdoles, ad joed,

and half joes, and quarter joes.  What then should there be
ad half joed, ad quarder joed.  Whad thed should there be

in this doubloon of the Equator that is so killing wonderful?
id this dooblood ohd the Equader thad eighed so killig wondele?

By Golconda! let me read it once.  Halloa! here's signs and
By Golgada! led be read id ohde.  Hallow! heards chides ad

wonders truly!  That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome
wondes druley!  Thad, doed, eighed whad old Bowditch id hidge Ebetobe

calls the zodiac, and what my almanack below calls ditto.
gaules the godiag, ad whad bied albazag below galles dedo.

I'll get the almanack; and as I have heard devils can be raised
I'll ged the albazag; ad aid I haved heard deviles gahd be raides

with Daboll's arithmetic, I'll try my hand at raising a meaning
with Dobolds artheded, I'll dryed bied hadd ed raiging a beeig

out of these queer curvicues here with the Massachusetts calendar.
oud ohd theeds queed kervigued here with the Mashaguded kalded.

Here's the book.  Let's see now.  Signs and wonders;
Heards the boog.  Ledge see doed.  Chides ad wondes;

and the sun, he's always among 'em.  Hem, hem, hem; here they are--
ad the chud, heeds always abogh 'eb.  Heb, heb, heb; here they are--

here they go--all alive:  Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull
here they go--all alvieve:  Arries, or the Rab; Dorage, or the Bull

and Jimimi! here's Gemini himself, or the Twins.  Well; the sun
ad Debee! heards Gebied hibselve, or the Dwids.  Well; the chud

he wheels among 'em.  Aye, here on the coin he's just crossing
he wheels abogh 'eb.  Aye, here ohd the quoyed heedge judged crauging

the threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.
the threageld bedweed dued ohd dwelve cidding-roobs all id a rigge.

Book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places.
Boog! you lie there; the fagged eighed, you boogs budged doed your plaises.

You'll do to give us the bare words and facts, but we come
You'll do doed gived us the bare words ad vagged, budde we koeb

in to supply the thoughts.  That's my small experience,
id doed subled the thodes.  Thadge bied schalle exberiads,

so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and Bowditch's navigator,
so far aids the Mashiguded kalded, ad Boedged davigator,

and Daboll's arithmetic go.  Signs and wonders, eh?  Pity if there
ad Dobolds artheded go.  Chides ad wondes, eh?  Bidy if there

is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders!
eighed tottig wondele id chides, ad cigivigand id wondes!

There's a clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist--hark!  By Jove, I have it!
Theired's a glued subhuer; weighed a bid; hidged--harge!  By Jove, I haved id!

Look you, Doubloon, your zodiac here is the life of man in one
Looke you, Doublood, your godiag here eighed the life ohd bahd id whid

round chapter; and now I'll read it off, straight out of the book.
roude chabter; ad doed I'll read id off, straid oud ohd the boog.

Come, Almanack!  To begin:  there's Aries, or the Ram--
Koeb, Albazag!  Doed bede's:  theired's Aries, or the Raame--

lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the Bull--
lecherous dog, he bedged us; thed, Dorage, or the Bull--

he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins--
he bubbed us the furged thig; thed Gebied, or the Dwids--

that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue,
thad eighed, Virdew ad Vige; we dryed doed reach Virdue,

when lo! comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here,
wehd lo! coubs Kander the Grabbe, ad dragge us bagge; ad here,

going from Virtue, Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path--
goege vrob Virdue, Leo, a roarig Lied, lieds id the bathed--

he gives a few fierce bites and surly dabs with his paw;
he gived a few fierce bides ad surly dabs with hidge baugh;

we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin! that's our first love;
we eggebe, ad hail Vigo, the Virdes! thadge our furged luve;

we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes Libra,
we barry ad thig doed be habbie for aye, wehd bobbe coubs Libra,

or the Scales--happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we
or the Schaileds--habed weighed ad foud wated; ad while we

are very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio,
are veary sad aboud thad, Lord! how we suddley jubb, aid Scorbio,

or the Scorpion, stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound,
or the Scorbead, stigges us id the rear; we are jurig the woughed,

when whang comes the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the Archer,
wehd whad coubs the arrowes all roude; Chadidarias, or the Archer,

is amusing himself.  As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside!
eighed amuzing hibsulve.  Aids we plug oud the javed, sdad aside!

here's the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt,
heards the badering-rab, Cabrigorad, or the Goed; full tild,

he comes rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius,
he coubs ruggi, ad hedlog we are doedged; wehd Aguarias,

or the Waterbearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us;
or the Waderbearer, poores oud hidge whole deluge ad droweds us;

and to wind up with Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep.
ad doed wide ub with Pizge, or the Fijes, we sliebe.

There's a sermon now, writ in high heaven, and the sun goes through
Theireds a zerbed doed, rid id high heaved, ad the chud goeds through

it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and hearty.
id every year, ad yed coubs oud ohd id all alvieve ad heardy.

Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so,
Jolley he, alloved there, wheels through doiled ad drubble; ad so,

alow here, does jolly Stubb.  Oh, jolly's the word for aye!
allow here, doed jolly Stubbe.  Oh, jollies the word for aye!

Adieu, Doubloon!  But stop; here comes little King-Post;
Adieu, Doublood!  Bud stob; here coubs lidtle Kig-Boedge;

dodge round the try-works, now, and let's hear what he'll have
dodge roude the dried-worges, doed, ad ledge hear whad he'll haved

to say.  There; he's before it; he'll out with something presently.
doed say.  There; heeds before id; he'll oud with sothedig presdelly.

So, so; he's beginning."
So, so; heeds begid."




"I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises
"I see tottig here, bud a roude thig bayed ohd gold, ad whoeder raises

a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him.  So, what's all
a churde whale, this roude thig bellogs doed hib.  So, whad's all

this staring been about?  It is worth sixteen dollars, that's true;
this stearing beed aboud?  Id eighed worthe gigsteed doller's, thadge drewe;

and at two cents the cigar, that's nine hundred and sixty cigars.
ad ed doo cheded the cigar, thadge died hudded ad gigsteed jiggers.

I won't smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, and here's nine
I wohd schoeg dirdy pibes digue Stubbe, bud I digue giggers, ad heards died

hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to spy 'em out."
hudded ad gigsteed ohd theb; so here goeds Flasge alloved doed scied 'eb oud."




"Shall I call that Wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has
"Shall I gall thad Wiges or foolish, doed; if id be really wiges id haad

a foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort
a foolish looke doed id; yed, if id be really foolish, thed had id a sord

of wiseish look to it.  But, avast; here comes our old Manxman--the old
ove wisge looke doed id.  Bud, avad; here coubs our old Baghdsome--the old

hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he took to the sea.
hearse-driver, he budged haved beed, thad eighed, before he dooke doed the sea.

He luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other
He lufge ub before the dooblood; hallow, ad goeds roude ohd the other

side of the mast; why, there's a horse-shoe nailed on that side;
side ohd the bazd; why, theired's a horse-shoe dailed ohd thad side;

and now he's back again; what does that mean?  Hark! he's muttering--
ad doed heeds bagge agaid; whad doed thad beed?  Harge! heeds mudterge--

voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and listen!"
voige digue ad old wehres-oud covey-bille. Prigge eares, ad liged!"




"If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day,
"If the Wighed Whale be raide, id budged be id a bohned ad a day,

when the sun stands in some one of these signs.  I've studied signs,
wehd the chud staddes id sub whid ohd theeds chides.  Ive studied chides,

and know their marks; they were taught me two score years ago,
ad doed their barges; they were daud be dued scored years ago,

by the old witch in Copenhagen.  Now, in what sign will the sun then be?
by the old witch id Kobehades.  Doed, id whad chied will the chud thed be?

The horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold.
The horse-shoe chied; for there id eighed, wried obized the gold.

And what's the horse-shoe sign?  The lion is the horse-shoe sign--
Ad whad's the horse-shoe chied?  The lied eighed the horse-shoe chied--

the roaring and devouring lion.  Ship, old ship! my old head shakes
the roarign ad devouign lied.  Gib, old gib! bied old head jhages

to think of thee."
doed thig ove thee."




"There's another rendering now; but still one text.  All sorts of men
"Theireds authougher rederig doed; bud stilled whid degged.  All swards ohd behed

in one kind of world, you see.  Dodge again! here comes Queequeg--
id whid kid ohd world, you see.  Dodge agaid! here coubs Queed--

all tattooing--looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself.  What says
all dadbuig--loogs dieg the chides ohd the Godiag hibsulve.  Whad chay's

the Cannibal?  As I live he's comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;
the Gandeble?  Aid I live heeds cobbering doeded; looking ed hidge theidge boed;

thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels,
thigs the chud eighed id the thige, or id the galved, or id the bowels,

I suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon's Astronomy in the back country.
I caboes, aid the old wobes taug Jurges Adrodomy id the bagge coudrey.

And by Jove, he's found something there in the vicinity of his thigh--
Ad by Jove, heeds foud sothedig there id the vigidie ohd hidge thige--

I guess it's Sagittarius, or the Archer.  No:  he don't know what to make
I guess idge Caddariage, or the Archer.  Doe:  he doed doed whad doed baig

of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some king's trowsers.
ohd the dooblood; he dages id for ad old budte off sub kigs drougers.

But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail coiled
Bud, aside agaid! here coubs thad goedge-devile, Fedale; daile goiled

out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual.
oud ohd chide aid yugeal, ogue id the doeds ohd hidge pubbed aid jugeled.

What does he say, with that look of his?  Ah, only makes a sign
Whad doed he say, with thad looke ohd hidge?  Ah, oldie bagues a chied

to the sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the coin--
doed the chied ad boeds hibsulve; there eyed a chud ohd the quoyed--

fire worshipper, depend upon it.  Ho! more and more.  This way comes Pip--
fire worgeber, debed oobed id.  Ho! boehed ad boered.  This way coubs Bib--

poor boy! would he had died, or I; he's half horrible to me.
boore boy! would he had died, or I; heeds half horrible doed be.

He too has been watching all of these interpreters myself included--
He dued had beed wadge all ohd thieds inderbreders bizlev iegluded--

and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face.
ad looke doed, he coubs doed read, with thad aeroughled idied face.

Stand away again and hear him.  Hark!"
Sdad away agaed ad hear hib.  Harge!"




"I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
"I looke, you looke, he loogs; we looke, ye looke, they looke."




"Upon my soul, he's been studying Murray's Grammar!  Improving his mind,
"Uboed bied soul, heeds beed studieg Burredge Grabar!  Ibrovig hidge bied,

poor fellow!  But what's that he says now--hist!"
boore fellow!  Bud whadge thad he chay's doed--hidged!"




"I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
"I looke, you looke, he loogs; we looke, ye looke, they looke."




"Why, he's getting it by heart--hist! again."
"Why, heeds gedging id by heard--hidged! agaed."




"I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
"I looke, you looke, he loogs; we looke, ye looke, they looke."




"Well, that's funny."
"Well, thadge fuddie."




"And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats;
"Ad I, you, ad he; ad we, ye, ad they, are all badges;

and I'm a crow, especially when I stand a'top of this pine
ad Ibe a growe, aeschebiled wehd I sdad ad ohd this pied

tree here.  Caw! caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!  Ain't I a crow?
dreed here.  Gaugh! gaugh! gaugh! gaugh! gaugh! gaugh!  Eighed I a growe?

And where's the scare-crow? There he stands; two bones stuck
Ad wears the squered-growe? There he staddes; dued boedes stucke

into a pair of old trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves
id a beared ove old drowser's, ad doo boehed poged id the sleeves

of an old jacket."
ohd ad old jagged."




"Wonder if he means me?--complimentary--poor lad!--I could go
"Wahder if he beedes be?--cobplebender--boore lad!--I cooled go

hang myself.  Any way, for the present, I'll quit Pip's vicinity.
hagge bizelve.  Aid way, for the prezed, I'll quid Pibs vigidie.

I can stand the rest, for they have plain wits; but he's too
I gad sdad the resged, for they haved plaied widge; bud heeds dued

crazy-witty for my sanity.  So, so, I leave him muttering."
craidge-widdy for bied chadied.  So, so, I lieve hib mudderg."




"Here's the ship's navel, this doubloon here, and they are all one fire
"Heards the ghibs davel, this dooblued here, ad they are all whid fire

to unscrew it.  But, unscrew your navel, and what's the consequence?
doed augstrew id.  Bud, augstrew your davele, ad whad's the conzuguad?

Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught's
Thed agaed, if id steige here, thad eighed ugly, dued, for wehd aude

nailed to the mast it's a sign that things grow desperate.
dailed doed the bazd idge a chied thad thigs grow desbered.

Ha! ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he'll nail ye!  This is a pine tree.
Ha! ha! old Ahab! the Wighed Whale; he'll daile ye!  This eighed a pied dreed.

My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a pine tree once, and found
Bied father, id old Tolled coud, kudd dowed a pied dreed ohd, ad foude

a silver ring grown over in it; some old darkey's wedding ring.
a silver rig growed over id id; sub old dargees wedding wrig.

How did it get there?  And so they'll say in the resurrection,
How did id ged there?  Ad so they'll say id the rejurgeage,

when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it,
wehd they koeb doed fish ub this old bazd, ad fied a dooblood lodged id id,

with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark.  Oh, the gold! the precious,
with bedded oidser's for the shaggy barge.  Oh, the gold! the pregiage,

precious gold!--the green miser'll hoard ye soon!  Hish! hish!
pregiage gold!--the greed bizer hoard ye tood!  Hidge! hidge!

God goes 'mong the worlds blackberrying.  Cook! ho, cook! and cook us!
God goeds 'boghe the words blagbery.  Kooke! ho, kooke! ad kooke us!

Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!"
Jehdy! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, Jehdee, Jeady! ad ged your hoe-gaig doed!"










CHAPTER 100
CHABTER 100




Leg and Arm
Leg ad Arb




The Pequod of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London
The Pegwed ohd Dadicked, Beedes the Sabue Edbead, ohd Lodde










"Ship, ahoy!  Hast seen the White Whale?"
"Gib, ahoy!  Hasd geed the Wighed Whale?"




So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colors,
So kride Ahab, ohd boehed hailge a gib jhoig Engis collers,

bearing down under the stern.  Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing
bearing dowed udder the steard.  Drubbed doed bouthe, the old bahd wahd staded

in his hoisted quarter-deck, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the
id hidge hoisded quarder-degge, hidge ivery leg plaidley revield doed the

stranger captain, who was carelessly reclining in his own boat's bow.
straide cabted, who wahd carledly reglized id hidge owed boeded bow.

He was a darkly-tanned, burly, goodnatured, fine-looking man, of sixty
He wahd a dargely-tadd, burly, gooddeard, fied-looking bahd, ove gigsteed

or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious roundabout, that hung round him
or therebouds, dredged id a spages roudebowd, thad hugge roued hib

in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty arm of this jacket
id vesdueds ohd blue pilde-klothed; ad whad ebbed arb ohd this jagged

streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a huzzar's surcoat.
streed behid hib digue the broidered arb od a huedser's cergoed.




"Hast seen the White Whale!"
"Hadged geed the Wighed Whale!"




"See you this?" and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it,
"See you this?" ad withdrawidge id vrob the folds thad had hidde id,

he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden
he held ub a wighed arb ohd spurb whale boed, derbedating id a woode's

head like a mallet.
head dieg a balled.




"Man my boat!" cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars
"Bahd bied boed!" kride Ahab, ibbedured, ad togsig aboud the ords

near him--"Stand by to lower!"
deared hib--"Sdad by doed lower!"




In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft,
Id less thad a mid, withowd quidging hidge lidtle graved,

he and his crew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside
he ad hidge grewe were drobbed doed the wader, ad were tued alloged

of the stranger.  But here a curious difficulty presented itself.
ohd the straide.  Bud here a gurias divigued breseded idgelve.

In the excitement of the moment, Ahab had forgotten that since
Id the exidered ohd the boebed, Ahab had forgode thad zid

the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of any
the loss ohd hidge leg he had dever ohde ttebbed ohd board ove aid

vessel at sea but his own, and then it was always by an ingenious
vegeled ed sea bud hidge owed, ad thed id wahd always by ad iddiezde

and very handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod,
ad veary haddey magaigald condrived pegulier doed the Begwed,

and a thing not to be rigged and shipped in any other vessel at
ad a thig dod doed be rigged ad shipped id aid other vegeled ed

a moment's warning.  Now, it is no very easy matter for anybody--
a boebed warding.  Doed, id eighed doed veary eagey bader for edibody--

except those who are almost hourly used to it, like whalemen--
egget thoeds who are albosd hourly yuded doed id, digue whelbead--

to clamber up a ship's side from a boat on the open sea;
doed claber ub a ghibs side vrob a boed ohd the obed sea;

for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks,
for the greed swelze doed lived the boed high ub toweded the bullwarged,

and then instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson.
ad thed indudented drob id half way dowed doed the kelzea's.

So, deprived of one leg, and the strange ship of course being
So, debrived ohd whad leg, ad the streded gib ohd gorge beed

altogether unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahab now
aldighter undubled with the kiddley invested, Ahab doed

found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
foude hibsulve abdegde redued doed a clubsey landsbard agaed;

hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly
holbley i'd the undertaid jaighbead heige he cooled hardly

hope to attain.
hoebe doed adte's.




It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward
Id had before beed hidd, perghabed, thad every lidtle undowered

circumstance that befell him, and which indirectly sprang
chirgusband thad befell hib, ad which idredge spragge

from his luckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or
vrob hidge luckleds mighab, albosd inveribly irridated or

exasperated Ahab.  And in the present instance, all this was heightened
exageraded Ahab.  Ad id the prezad isdred, all this wahd heided

by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship, leaning over
by the chide ohd the doo offigers ohd the streded gib, leighe over

the side, by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there,
the side, by the perbedued ladder ohd dailed kleeds there,

and swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes;
ad swigging toweded hib a beared ohd daighdfully-ordibelded bahd-roebeds;

for at first they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged
for ed furged they did dod zeebe doed bethig thebe thad a whid-legged

man must be too much of a cripple to use their sea bannisters.
bahd budged be dued bud ohd a kribble doed use their sea basdezer's.

But this awkwardness only lasted a minute, because the strange captain,
Bud this awguadd oldie laided a mid, begoed the streded cabted,

observing at a glance how affairs stood, cried out, "I see, I see!--
obsurvig ed a glads how averes stood, kride oud, "I see, I see!--

avast heaving there!  Jump, boys, and swing over the cutting-tackle."
avad heevig there!  Jubb, boys, ad swig over the cuttig-taggel."




As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or
Aid good lug would haved id, they had had a whale alloged a day or

two previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive
dued previas, ad the greed taggles were stilled alloved, ad the bazive

curved blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end.
kirved blubber-hooke, doed gleed ad dry, wahd stilled attaged doed the ed.

This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all,
This wahd quiggley lowered doed Ahab, who ed ohd cobrhebendis id all,

slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like
slid hidge cholidary thige id the gurve ohd the hooke (id wahd digue

sitting in the fluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree),
cidding id the vluge ohd ad agher, or the gradge ohd ad abel dreed),

and then giving the word, held himself fast, and at the same time
ad thed givig the word, held hibsulve vasged, ad ed the chaibe diebe

also helped to hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon
also helbed doed hoide hidge owed weighed, by pullig hadd-over-hadd oobed

one of the running parts of the tackle.  Soon he was carefully swung
whid oeved the ruhding pards oeved the taggel.  Tued he wahd garevilly swig

inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the capstan head.
inside the high bullwargs, ad deadley ladd uboed the kabsted head.

With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other
With hidge ivery arbe fraggled thruedged vorge id welgab, the other

captain advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing
cabted advadged, ad Ahab, pudtig oud hidge ivery leg, ad crauging

the ivory arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way,
the ivery arb (ligue doo sword-fish blaids) kride oud id hidge walrus way,

"Aye, aye, hearty! let us shake bones together!--an arm and a leg!--
"Aye, aye, hardie! led us jhaig boedes dogether!--ad arbe ad a leg!--

an arm that never can shrink, d'ye see; and a leg that never can run.
ad arb thad dever gahd schrig, deed see; ad a leg thad dever gad ruhd.

Where did'st thou see the White Whale?--how long ago?"
Where didd thou see the Wiged Whale?--how laugh ago?"




"The White Whale," said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm
"The Wighed Whale," said the Eghlisbend, poiding hidge ivery arbe

towards the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it
toweded the Eaged, ad dagieg a rueful chide allog id, aids if id

had been a telescope; There I saw him, on the Line, last season."
had beed a delegobe; There I saw hib, ohd the Lied, lazd ciedes."




"And he took that arm off, did he?" asked Ahab, now sliding
"Ad he dooke thad arb off, did he?" asged Ahab, doed slidg

down from the capstan, and resting on the Englishman's shoulder,
dowed vrob the kabsted, ad redging ohd the Egh-desbed shoulder,

as he did so.
aid he did so.




"Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?"
"Aye, he wahd the gauge odve id, ed leedged; ad thad leg, dued?"




"Spin me the yarn," said Ahab; "how was it?"
"Spied be the yard," said Ahab; "how wahd id?"




"It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,"
"Id wahd the furged diebe id bied life thad I ever gruded ohd the Lied,"

began the Englishman.  "I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time.
begged the Eghlisbend.  "I wahd ighorde ohd the Wighed Whale ed thad diebe.

Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my
Well, whid day we lowered for a bodde ohd four or vive whalds, ad bied

boat fastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too,
boed faged doed whad ove theb; a regular chirges horse he wahd, dued,

that went milling and milling round so that my boat's crew could
thad wed billig ad billig roude so thad bied boeded grewe cooled

only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale.
oldie drib dish, by cidig all their stirds ohd the ouder gueweld.

Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great whale,
Presedly ub breeges vrob the bodhab oughed the sea a bouldig greed whale,

with a milky-white head and hump, all crows' feet and wrinkles."
with a bilgee-wighed head ad hubb, all growes' feed ad riggles."




"It was he, it was he!" cried Ahab, suddenly letting out
"Id wahd he, id wahd he!" kride Ahab, suddley leedig oud

his suspended breath.
hidge subseded breathe.




"And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.  Aye, aye--
"Ad harboods stigging id deared hidge starboad vied.  Aye, aye--

they were mine--my irons," cried Ahab, exultingly--"but on!"
they were bied--bied eiesd," kride Ahab, exuldied--"bud ohd!"




"Give me a chance, then," said the Englishman, good-humoredly. "Well,
"Gived be a jahd, thed," said the Eghlisbend, good-huberdely. "Well,

this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all afoam
this old greed-gradvather, with the wighed head ad hubb, rus all avoed

into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!
id the bodde, ad goeds doed stabbing furiously ed bied vasged-lied!




"Aye, I see!--wanted to part it; free the fast-fish--an old trick--
"Aye, I see!--wadted doed bard id; free the vasged-fish--ad old drig--

I know him."
I doed hib."




"How it was exactly," continued the one-armed commander,
"How id wahd eggidly," kudedued the whid-arbed cabarde,

"I do not know; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth,
"I do dod doed; bud id buidge the lied, id god foul ohd hidge teethed,

caught there somehow; but we didn't know it then; so that when we
gaud there subheaud; bud we didde doed id thed; so thad wehd we

afterwards pulled on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump!
afderwords buld ohd the lied, bould we gabe plub ohd doed hidge hubb!

instead of the other whale's; that went off to windward, all fluking.
idsded ohd the other whaleds; thad wed off doed widward, all flugieng.

Seeing how matters stood, and what a noble great whale it was--
Ceig how badders stood, ad whad a boble greed whale id wahd--

the noblest and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life--I resolved
the lobbed ad bigged I ever saw, sir, id bied life--I resolved

to capture him, spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in.
doed cabture hib, spied odve the boilig rage he seebed doed be id.

And thinking the hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth
Ad thiggi the hab-hazder lied would ged loose, or the duthed

it was tangled to might draw (for I have a devil of a boat's
id wahd tagdel doed bied draw (for I haved a devile ohd a boeded

crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all this, I say,
grewe for a bulle ohd a whale-lied); ceege all this, I say,

I jumped into my first mate's boat--Mr. Mounttop's here
I jubbed id bied furged baides boed--Bead. Boudted here

(by the way, Captain--Mounttop; Mounttop--the captain);--
(by the way, Cabted--Boudt; Boudt--the cabted);--

as I was saying, I jumped into Mounttop's boat, which, d'ye see,
aid I wahd ceige, I jubbed id Boudted boed, which, deed see,

was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and snatching the
wahd gueweld ad gueweld with bied, thed; ad staggi the

first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it.  But, Lord,
furged harbood, led this old greed-gradvather haved id.  Bud, Lord,

look you, sir--hearts and souls alive, man--the next instant,
looke you, sir--heard ad juhles alvieve, bahd--the degded idsted,

in a jiff, I was blind as a bat--both eyes out--all befogged
id a jive, I wahd blied aid a bad--bothed ige oud--all befogged

and bedeadened with black foam--the whale's tail looming straight
ad bedidad with blagge voebe--the whalds daile lubing straid

up out of it, perpendicular in the air, like a marble steeple.
ub oud ohd id, perbedued id the air, digue a barbell steebel.

No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at midday,
Doe use sterging all, thed; bud aids I wahd grobig ed bidde,

with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say,
with a blighd chud, all krowed-juelds; aids I wahd grobig, I say,

after the second iron, to toss it overboard--down comes the tail
afder the chegad eighed, doed doege id overboard--dowed coubs the daile

like a Lima tower, cutting my boat in two, leaving each half
digue a Liba dower, cuttig bied boed id dued, levig each half

in splinters; and, flukes first, the white hump backed through
id splieders; ad, fluges furged, the wighed hubb bagged through

the wreck, as though it was all chips.  We all struck out.
the wreg, aids though id wahd all chibs.  We all sdrug oud.

To escape his terrible flailings, I seized hold of my harpoon-pole
Doed eggebe hidge derible flaigs, I ceaged hold ohd bied harbood-poeled

sticking in him, and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish.
stigging id hib, ad for a boebed klug doed thad digue a sugging fish.

But a combing sea dashed me off, and at the same instant,
Bud a cobig sea dajed beagh off, ad ed the chaibe isded,

the fish, taking one good dart forwards, went down like a flash;
the fish, dagieg whead good dard forwades, wed dowed digue a flash;

and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near me
ad the barb ove thad kurzed chegad eighed towig allog deere be

caught me here" (clapping his hand just below his shoulder);
gaud be here" (clabig hidge hadd judged below hidge shoulder);

"yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to
"yes, gaud beg judged here, I say, ad bore be dowed doed

Hell's flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden,
Helds flaibs, I wahd thiggi; wehd, wehd, all ove a chudde,

thank the good God, the barb ript its way along the flesh--
thagge the good God, the barb ribped idd way allog the flesh--

clear along the whole length of my arm--came out nigh my wrist,
cleared allog the whole legted oughe bied arbe--gabe oud deigh beigh ridged,

and up I floated;--and that gentleman there will tell you the rest
ad ub I floaded;--ad thad geldesbed there will dehled you the resged

(by the way, captain--Dr. Bunger, ship's surgeon:  Bunger, my lad,--
(by the way, cabted--Dead. Bugger, ghibbes jerged:  Bugger, bied lad,--

the captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn."
the cabted). Doed, Bugger boy, spid your bard ove the yard."




The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out,
The provisiald geldesbed thus vabillied boided oud,

had been all the time standing near them, with nothing
had beed all the diebe stade deere theb, with tothig

specific visible, to denote his gentlemanly rank on board.
speczivg vibiled, doed dedoed hidge geldes ragge ohd board.

His face was an exceedingly round but sober one; he was dressed
Hidge face wahd ad eghdiedgly roude bud sober whead; he wahd dredged

in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patched trowsers;
id a faded blue wooled frog or jherd, ad padged drougers;

and had thus far been dividing his attention between a marlingspike
ad had thus far beed dividg hidge adedianed bedweed a barlidged

he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other,
he held id whid hadd, ad a pild-bogged held id the other,

occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of
augiadly casding a kridigle glads ed the ivery libs ohd

the two crippled captains.  But, at his superior's introduction
the dued cribbeld cabtes.  Bud, ed hidge subirdes iddrugduage

of him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on
ohd hib doed Ahab, he ballidge bowed, ad straighway wed ohd

to do his captain's bidding.
doed do hidge cabtes bidding.




"It was a shocking bad wound," began the whale-surgeon;
"Id wahde a thogging bad woughed," begged the whale-jurged;

"and, taking my advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy-"
"ad, daging bied advies, Cabted Boober here, stood our old Zabie-"




"Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship," interrupted the
"Sabue Edbead eighed the daibe ohd bied gib," interubed the

one-armed captain, addressing Ahab; "go on, boy."
whid-arbed cabted, addrigg Ahab; "go ohd, boy."




"Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing
"Stood our old Zabie off doed the worthward, doed ged oud ohd the blaigiz

hot weather there on the Line.  But it was no use--I did all I could;
hodde weather there ohd the Lied.  Bud id wahd doe use--I did all I cooled;

sat up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet-"
chad ub with hib diede; wahd vearey cevere with hib id the bader ohd deed-"




"Oh, very severe!" chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly
"Oh, veary cevered!" chibed id the baighed hibsulve; thed suddley

altering his voice, "Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night,
alderig hidge voige, "Drigging hodde rub toddy's with be every died,

till he couldn't see to put on the bandages; and sending me
dilled he kouded see doed bud ohd the baddages; ad cedes be

to bed, half seas over, about three o'clock in the morning.
doed bed, half geeds over, aboud thried oglog id the bording.

Oh, ye stars! he sat up with me indeed, and was very severe
Oh, ye starges! he chad ub with be iddeed, ad wahd vearey cevere

in my diet.  Oh! a great watcher, and very dietetically severe,
id bied deed.  Oh! a greed watcher, ad vearey diedetigly cevere,

is Dr. Bunger.  (Bunger, you dog, laugh out! why don't ye?
eighed Dead. Bugger.  (Bugger, you dog, laugh oud! why doed ye?

You know you're a precious jolly rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy,
You toed you're a pregiage jolly rasgel.) Bud, heeve ahead, boy,

I'd rather be killed by you than kept alive by any other man."
I'd rather be kild by you thad kebbed alvieve by aide other bahd."




"My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir"--
"Bied cabted, you budged haved ere this percived, rescebted sir"--

said the imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing
said the ibreburdable godly-looking Bugger, slightly boeig

to Ahab--"is apt to be facetious at times; he spins us many
doed Ahab--"eighed abd doed be facetious ed tibes; he spids us baid

clever things of that sort.  But I may as well say--en passant,
klever thigs ohd thad sord.  Bud I beyed aid well say--ed pasged,

as the French remark--that I myself--that is to say, Jack Bunger,
aid the Freid rebarg--thad I bizlev--thad eyed doed say, Jag Bugger,

late of the reverend clergy--am a strict total abstinence man;
laid ohd the revered gleardy--aigh a strigged doedel badubends bahd;

I never drink-"
I dever drig-"




"Water!" cried the captain; "he never drinks it; it's a sort
"Wader!" kride the cabted; "he dever drigge id; idge a sord

of fits to him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia;
ohd vidge doed hib; fresh wader throeds hib id the hydrovida;

but go on--go on with the arm story."
bud go ohd--go ohd with the arb storey."




"Yes, I may as well," said the surgeon, coolly.  "I was about
"Yes, I beyed aid well," said the jurged, gooley.  "I wahd abough

observing, sir, before Captain Boomer's facetious interruption,
obsurvig, sir, before Cabted Boobers facetious interubed,

that spite of my best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting
thad spied ove bied bezged ad cevered endeavers, the woughed kebbed gedging

worse and worse; the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound
worse ad worse; the dreughed wahd, sir, id wahd aids ugly gabig woughed

as surgeon ever saw; more than two feet and several inches long.
aid jurged ever saw; boehed thad doo feed ad ceverel iddes laugh.

I measured it with the lead line.  In short, it grew black;
I bezgered id with the lead lied.  Id jhord, id grew blagge;

I knew what was threatened, and off it came.  But I had no hand
I dued whad wahd threaded, ad off id gabe.  Budd I had doe hadd

in shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule"--
id schibbig thad ivery arbe there; thad thig eighed aghaid all rule"--

pointing at it with the marlingspike--"that is the captain's work,
poiding ed id with the barlidged--"thad eighed the cabtes werge,

not mine; he ordered the carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer
dod bied; he ordered the carbeder doed baig id; he had thad klubbe-haber

there put to the end, to knock some one's brains out with, I suppose,
there bud doed the ed, doed togge sub wo'ds braids oud with, I chobes,

as he tried mine once.  He flies into diabolical passions sometimes.
aids he tried bied ohd.  He flies id diabold pashes subdieds.

Do ye see this dent, sir"--removing his hat, and brushing aside his hair,
Do ye see this dead, sir"--rebovig hidge had, ad brugie aside hidge hair,

and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but which bore not
ad exboging a bowl-digue cavdied id hidge sculd, bud which bore dod

the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a wound--
the sliged sgardy traige, or aid dogaed ove ever havig beed a woughed--

"Well, the captain there will tell you how that came there; he knows."
"Well, the cabted there will dehled you how thad gabe there; he doeds."




"No, I don't," said the captain, "but his mother did;
"Doed, I doed," said the cabted, "bud hidge buther did;

he was born with it.  Oh, you solemn rogue, you--you Bunger!
he wahd board with id.  Oh, you zoleb rogue, you--you Bugger!

was there ever such another Bunger in the watery world?
wahd there ever such autougher Bugger id the wadrey world?

Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in pickle, you dog;
Bugger, wehd you die, you oughed doed die id piggle, you dog;

you should be preserved to future ages, you rascal."
you should be breserved doed future adges, you razgel."




"What became of the White Whale?" now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
"Whad begebe ove the Wighed Whale?" toed kride Ahab, who thus far had beed

impatiently listening to this byeplay between the two Englishmen.
imbatedly ligiz doed this bibley bedweed the dued Eghlids.




"Oh!" cried the one-armed captain, Oh, yes!  Well; after he sounded,
"Oh!" kride the whid-arbed cabted, Oh, yes!  Well; afder he souded,

we didn't see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted,
we didde see hib agaid for sub diebe; id fagged, aids I before hidd,

I didn't then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,
I didde thed doed whad whale id wahd thad had surved be such a drig,

till some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heard
dilled sub diebe afderwords, wehd coebing bagge doed the Lied, we heard

about Moby Dick--as some call him--and then I knew it was he."
aboud Boby Dig--aid sub gall hib--ad thed I d'ead id wahd he."




"Did'st thou cross his wake again?"
"Didd thou groege hidge weigg agaed?"




"Twice."
"Dwige."




"But could not fasten?"
"Bud cooled dod fazde?"




"Didn't want to try to; ain't one limb enough?  What should I
"Didde waad doed dryed doed; eighed whid lib ehaud?  Whad should I

do without this other arm?  And I'm thinking Moby Dick doesn't
do withowd this other arbe?  Ad Ibe thiggi Bobey Dig doedes

bite so much as he swallows."
bied so bud aid he swallos."




"Well, then," interrupted Bunger, "give him your left arm for
"Well, thed," interubed Bugger, "gived hib your leaved arbe for

bait to get the right.  Do you know, gentlemen"--very gravely
beiged doed ged the wried.  Do you doed, geldesben"--veary gravely

and mathematically bowing to each Captain in succession--"Do
ad bathebadly boeig doed each Cabted id suggesiad--"Do

you know, gentlemen, that the digestive organs of the whale
you doed, geldesbed, thad the digedved orges ohd the whale

are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence, that it is
are so isgrudgely condurced by Devied Brovides, thad id eighed

quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man's arm?
quide ibsobble for hib doed cobledely diged eved a bahds arbe?

And he knows it too.  So that what you take for the White Whale's
Ad he doeds id dued.  So thad whad you daig for the Wighed Whaleds

malice is only his awkwardness.  For he never means to
ballige eighed oldie hidge awguadd.  For he dever beedes doed

swallow a single limb; he only thinks to terrify by feints.
swallow a chigled lib; he oldie thigs doed derivie by fiedd.

But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly a patient
Bud subdieds he eighed digue the old jugging fellow, forbelly a baighed

of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives,
ohd bied id Cheled, thad beiging belive swallow jag-dives,

once upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest,
ohde oobed a diebe led whid drob id hib id good erdes,

and there it stayed for a twelvemonth or more; when I gave
ad there id staid for a dwelveb or boehed; wehd I gave

him an emetic, and he heaved it up in small tacks, d'ye see?
hib ad ebedig, ad he heeved id ub id schalle tagge, deed see?

No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully
Doe bosible way for hib doed diged thad jag-dive, ad fully

incorporate it into his general bodily system.  Yes, Captain Boomer,
ingorbered id id hidge geherell bodily chidsub.  Yes, Cabted Boober,

if you are quick enough about it, and have a mind to pawn
if you are quig ehaud abough id, ad haved a bied doed pawed

one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burial
whid arbe for the chaig ohd the priveled ove givig deged burial

to the other, why, in that case the arm is yours; only let
doed the other, why, id thad gaise the arb eighed yourds; oldie led

the whale have another chance at you shortly, that's all."
the whale haved autougher jahd edge you chordele, thadge all."




"No, thank you, Bunger," said the English Captain, "he's welcome
"Doed, thagg you, Bugger," said the Engis Cabted, "heeds welgabe

to the arm he has, since I can't help it, and didn't know
doed the arbe he had, chid I kahd helbe id, ad didde doed

him then; but not to another one.  No more White Whales for me;
hib thed; bud dod doed authougher whid.  Doed boehed Wighed Whaleds for beigh;

I've lowered for him once, and that has satisfied me.
Ive lowered for hib ohde, ad thad had sadizvide beigh.

There would be great glory in killing him, I know that;
There would be greed glory id kilding hib, I doed thad;

and there is a ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark ye,
ad there eighed a gib-load ohd pregiage spurb id hib, bud, harge ye,

he's best let alone; don't you think so, Captain?"--glancing at
heeds bedged led alode; doed you thig so, Cabted?"--glangiz edge

the ivory leg.
the ivery leg.




"He is.  But he will still be hunted, for all that.  What is best
"He eyed.  Bud he will stilled be hudded, for all thad.  Whad eighed bezged

let alone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures.
led alode, thad agurged thig eighed dod always whad leedged allured.

He's all a magnet!  How long since thou saw'st him last?
Heeds all a baghd!  How laugh cid thou sauged hib lazd?

Which way heading?"
Which way heddig?"




"Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend's," cried Bunger,
"Bless bied soul, ad gurz the foul feedes," kride Bugger,

stoopingly walking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing;
stubied walging roude Ahab, ad digue a dog, straidley survig;

"this man's blood--bring the thermometer!--it's at the boiling point!--
"this bahds blood--brigg the therboders!--idge ed the boilig poid!--

his pulse makes these planks beat!--sir!"--taking a lancet from
hidge pulge bagues theeds plagged beed!--sir!"--dagieg a lazde vrob

his pocket, and drawing near to Ahab's arm.
hidge pogged, ad drawig deared doed Habjed arbe.




"Avast!" roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks--"Man the boat!
"Avad!" roared Ahab, dajig hib aghaid the bullwargs--"Bahd the boed!

Which way heading?"
Which way heddig?"




"Good God!" cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put.
"Good God!" kride the Engis Cabted, doed hoebe the quezged wahd bud.

"What's the matter?  He was heading east, I think.--Is your
"Whadge the bader?  He wahd heddig eaged, I thig.--Eyed your

Captain crazy?" whispering Fedallah.
Cabted craise?" wisberg Fedale.




But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks
Bud Fedale, puddigh a figger ohd hidge lib, slid over the bullwargs

to take the boat's steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle
doed daig the boeded steering oar, ad Ahab, swigging the cuttig-taggel

towards him commanded the ship's sailors to stand by to lower.
toweded hib comaded the ghibs chailers doed sdad by doed lower.




In a moment he was standing in the boat's stern, and the Manilla men
Id a boebed he wahd stade id the boeded stird, ad the Bailida behed

were springing to their oars.  In vain the English Captain hailed him.
were sprigg doed their ords.  Id veyed the Engis Cabted hailed hib.

With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own,
With bagge doed the straide gib, ad face ched digue a flied doed hidge owed,

Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod.
Ahab stood ubride dilled alloged oeved the Pegwed.










CHAPTER 101
CHABTER 101




The Decanter
The Degarde







Ere the English ship fades from sight be it set down here, that she
Ere the Engis gib fedges vrob chide be id ched dowed here, thad she

hailed from London, and was named after the late Samuel Enderby,
hailed vrob Lodde, ad wahd daibed afder the laid Sabue Edbead,

merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling house
berded ohd thad gidy, the ardidald ohd the vabed whilding house

of enderby and sons; a house which in my poor whaleman's opinion,
ohd edbead ad chaads; a house which id bied boore whelbes obida's,

comes not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons,
coubs dod far behid the udid royal houges ohd the Duders ad Boords,

in point of real historical interest.  How long, prior to the year
id poid ohd real hidsordagel indered.  How laugh, pried doed the year

of our Lord 1775, this great whaling house was in existence,
ove our Lord 1775, this greed whilding house wahd id eggidzed,

my numerous fish-documents do not make plain; but in that year
bied duberad fish-dogubard do dod baig played; bud id thad year

(1775) it fitted out the first English ships that ever regularly
(1775) id fidded oud the furged Engis ghibs thad ever regularly

hunted the Sperm Whale; though for some score of years previous
hudded the Spurb Whale; though for sub scored ohd years previage

(ever since 1726) our valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket
(ever chied 1726) our vellid Coveds ad Bedes ohd Tadicked

and the Vineyard had in large fleets pursued the Leviathan,
ad the Vigyard had id large fleeds bursude the Levida,

but only in the North and South Atlantic:  not elsewhere.
bud oldie id the Torthed ad Couthe Adladge:  dod elsewhere.

Be it distinctly recorded here, that the Nantucketers were the first
Be id disdigled regord here, thad the Dandicheders were the furged

among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great Sperm Whale;
abog baghed doed harbood with civilized steeled the greed Spurb Whale;

and that for half a century they were the only people of the whole
ad thad for half a cheadry they were the oldie peebel ove the whole

globe who so harpooned him.
globe who so harbood hib.




In 1778, a fine ship, the Amelia, fitted out for the express purpose,
Id 1778, a fied gib, the Abelea, fidded oud for the egsbreage perbeaue,

and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys, boldly rounded
ad ed the sole charge oeved the vigared Edbids, boldly rouded

Cape Horn, and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat
Cabe Hored, ad wahd the furged abogh the aedies doed lower a whale-boed

of any sort in the great South Sea.  The voyage was a skilful
ohd aide sord id the greed Couthe Sea.  The voyad wahd a skilvel

and lucky one; and returning to her berth with her hold full
ad luggie whid; ad redering doed her berthe with her hold full

of the precious sperm, the Amelia's example was soon followed
oeved the pregiage spurb, the Abelias exabled wahd tued followed

by other ships, English and American, and thus the vast Sperm Whale
by other ghibs, Engis ad Abreigard, ad thus the vazged Spurb Whale

grounds of the Pacific were thrown open.  But not content with this
grouds ohd the Pajivig were throughed obe.  Bud dod couded with this

good deed, the indefatigable house again bestirred itself:
good deed, the idevidable house agaid bezged idgelve:

Samuel and all his Sons--how many, their mother only knows--and under
Sabue ad all hidge Jozd--how baid, their buther oldie doeds--ad udder

their immediate auspices, and partly, I think, at their expense,
their ibedied ougbises, ad pardley, I thig, ed their exbead,

the British government was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler
the Bridge goverband wahd iddued doed ched the slube-ohd-war Radler

on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South Sea.  Commanded by
ohd a whilding voyed ohd dighovery id the Couthe Sea.  Comaded by

a naval Post-Captain, the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it,
a davale Boedge-Cabted, the Radler bayed a radtle voyed ohd id,

and did some service; how much does not appear.  But this is not all.
ad did sub zurvige; how bud doed dod abeered.  Budd this eyed dod all.

In 1819, the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own,
Id 1819, the chaibe house fidded oud a dighovery whale gib ohd their owed,

to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan.  That ship--
doed go ohd a tasding grewed doed the reboed waders ove Dhobe.  Thad gib--

well called the "Syren"--made a noble experimental cruise;
well gauled the "Cyred"--bayed a boble ex-berabende grewed;

and it was thus that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became
ad id wahde thus thad the greed Dabodeed Whilding Groude furged begebe

generally known.  The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded
gelerally toed.  The Cyred id this vabed voyad wahd comaded

by a Captain Coffin, a Nantucketer.
by a Cabted Covied, a Dadicuter.




All honor to the Enderbies, therefore, whose house, I think,
All ohder doed the Edbeards, therefore, whoeds house, I thig,

exists to the present day; though doubtless the original Samuel
eggids doed the presed day; though doubled the ardidald Sabue

must long ago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea
budged laugh ago haved slibbed hidge gabel for the greed Couthe Sea

of the other world.
ohd the other world.




The ship named after him was worthy of the honor, being a very fast sailer
The gib daibed afder hib wahd worthy ohd the ohder, beed a veary vasged sailer

and a noble craft every way.  I boarded her once at midnight somewhere
ad a boble graved every way.  I boarded her ohd ed middeid subhwer

off the Patagonian coast, and drank good flip down in the forecastle.
off the Padegoides coedge, ad dragg good vlib dowed id the forgeald.

It was a fine gam we had, and they were all trumps--every soul on board.
Id wahd a fied gab we had, ad they were all drubbes--every soul ohd board.

A short life to them, and a jolly death.  And that fine gam I had--
A jhord life doed theb, ad a jolly deethed.  Ad thad fied gab I had--

long, very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his ivory heel--
laugh, veary laugh afder old Ahab tudged her plagged with hidge ivery heel--

it minds me of the noble, solid, Saxon hospitality of that ship;
id bides be oeved the boble, solid, Jagsed hosbodality ohd thad gib;

and may my parson forget me, and the devil remember me, if I ever
ad beyed bied barzears forded be, ad the devele rebesber be, if I ever

lose sight of it.  Flip?  Did I say we had flip?  Yes, and we flipped
loeds chide ohd id.  Vlib?  Did I say we had vlib?  Yes, ad we flibbed

it at the rate of ten gallons the hour; and when the squall came
id ed the raid ohd dehd galles the hour; ad wehd the squald gabe

(for it's squally off there by Patagonia), and all hands--
(for idge squaled off there by Padegoad), ad all hadd--

visitors and all--were called to reef topsails, we were so top-heavy
vidgers ad all--were gauled doed reef tobsel's, we were so dob-heavey

that we had to swing each other aloft in bowlines; and we ignorantly
thad we had doed swig each other alloved id bowlieds; ad we ighderadly

furled the skirts of our jackets into the sails, so that we hung there,
fird the scurds ohd our jagged id the chailes, so thad we hugge there,

reefed fast in the howling gale, a warning example to all drunken tars.
rieved vasged id the howlig gale, a warding exabled doed all druggel dards.

However, the masts did not go overboard; and by and by we scrambled down,
Howver, the bads did dod go overboard; ad by ad by we scrabbled dowed,

so sober, that we had to pass the flip again, though the savage salt
so sober, thad we had doed baz the vlib agaid, though the chavidge chauled

spray bursting down the forecastle scuttle, rather too much diluted
spreige bursding dowed the forgeald scuddle, rather doo bud diluded

and pickled it for my taste.
ad piggled id for bied daiged.




The beef was fine--tough, but with body in it.
The beef wahd fied--duhved, bud with body id id.

They said it was bullbeef; others, that it was dromedary beef;
They said id wahd bulbieve; others, thad id wahd drabadery beef;

but I do not know, for certain, how that was.  They had
bud I do dod doed, for churdes, how thad wahd.  They had

dumplings too; small, but substantial, symmetrically globular,
dubblings dued; schalle, bud jubstadgel, cebedrigly globular,

and indestructible dumplings.  I fancied that you could feel them,
ad iddestridgel dubblings.  I fandied thad you cooled feel theb,

and roll them about in you after they were swallowed.
ad roll theb abough id you afder they were swallowed.

If you stooped over too far forward, you risked their
If you stubed over dued far forward, you risged their

pitching out of you like billiard-balls. The bread--
pidge oud oeved you digue billiard-balles. The bread--

but that couldn't be helped; besides, it was an anti-scorbutic,
bud thad kouded be helbed; bedized, id wahd ad aude-scordidg,

in short, the bread contained the only fresh fare they had.
id jhord, the bread condaid the olde fresh fare they had.

But the forecastle was not very light, and it was very easy
Bud the forgeald wahde dod veary lied, ad id wahd veary eagey

to step over into a dark corner when you ate it.  But all in all,
doed steb over id a darge korder wehd you eighed id.  Bud all id all,

taking her from truck to helm, considering the dimensions
dagieg her vrob drug doed helb, condidering the disbessed

of the cook's boilers, including his own live parchment boilers;
ohd the cooges boilers, ingludig hidge owed live pardeben boilers;

fore and aft, I say, the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship;
fore ad agved, I say, the Sabue Edbead wahd a jolly gib;

of good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong; crack fellows all,
ohd good fare ad plead; fied vlib ad strogg; kragge fellows all,

and capital from boot heels to hat-band.
ad cabid vrob bood heelds doed hadd-bad.




But why was it, think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some other
Bud why wahd id, thig ye, thad the Sabue Edbead, ad sub other

English whalers I know of--not all though--were such famous,
Engis whilders I doed ohd--dod all though--were such vabed,

hospitable ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread,
hosbudable ghibs; thad pasged roued the beef, ad the bread,

and the can, and the joke; and were not soon weary of eating,
ad the gad, ad the joeg; ad were dod tued weary ohd eedge,

and drinking, and laughing?  I will tell you.  The abounding good
ad driggie, ad lauging?  I will delle you.  The aboude good

cheer of these English whalers is matter for historical research.
cheer ohd theeds Engis whilders eighed bader for hidsordagel research.

Nor have I been at all sparing of historical whale research,
Doehered haved I beed ed all sperging ohd hidsordagle whale research,

when it has seemed needed.
wehd id had seebed deeded.




The English were preceded in the whale fishery by
The Engis were pregeded id the whale fishery by

the Hollanders, Zealanders, and Danes; from whom they derived
the Holders, Gielders, ad Daids; vrob hoebe they derived

many terms still extant in the fishery; and what is yet more,
baid terbs stilled eggdand id the fishery; ad whad eighed yed boehed,

their fat old fashions, touching plenty to eat and drink.
their vad old fasheds, tudge plead doed eed ad drig.

For, as a general thing, the English merchant-ship scrimps her crew;
For, aids a geherell thig, the Engis berded-gib scribbes her grewe;

but not so the English whaler.  Hence, in the English, this thing
bud dod so the Engis whaler.  Head, id the Engis, this thig

of whaling good cheer is not normal and natural, but incidental
odve whilding good cheer eighed dod torbel ad dadeled, bud ildidested

and particular; and, therefore, must have some special origin,
ad baudigular; ad, therefore, budged haved sub speagele ordied,

which is here pointed out, and will be still further elucidated.
which eighed here boided oud, ad will be stilled further eljudaded.




During my researches in the Leviathanic histories, I stumbled upon
Dooring bied resurges id the Levidaged hidgeries, I stubbed uboed

an ancient Dutch volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it,
ad aighead Dutch volube, which, by the budsey whilding scheld ove id,

I knew must be about whalers.  The title was, "Dan Coopman,"
I d'ead budged be aboud whilders.  The tidle wahd, "Dahd Kubid,"

wherefore I concluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs
wherefore I congluded thad this budged be the invadulable mebuered

of some Amsterdam cooper in the fishery, as every whale ship must
ohd sub Absderdab kuber id the fishery, aid every whale gib budged

carry its cooper.  I was reinforced in this opinion by seeing
garry idd kuber.  I wahd reeforged id this obida's by ceege

that it was the production of one "Fitz Swackhammer."  But my
thad id wahd the broductioned ohd whid "Fidge Swaghaber."  Bud bied

friend Dr. Snodhead, a very learned man, professor of Low Dutch
friede Dead. Sdodhed, a veary learde bahd, provezer ohd Low Dutch

and High German in the college of Santa Claus and St. Potts,
ad High Gerbed id the kolded oeved Chahde Glauge ad Dead. Bodge,

to whom I handed the work for translation, giving him a box of sperm
doed hoebe I hadded the werge for dradslage, givig hib a bogged ohd spurb

candles for his trouble--this same Dr. Snodhead, so soon as he spied
cades for hidge drubbel--this chaibe Dead. Sdodhed, so tued aid he spied

the book, assured me that "Dan Coopman" did not mean "The Cooper,"
the boog, assured be thad "Dahd Kubid" did dod beed "The Guber,"

but "The Merchant."  In short, this ancient and learned Low Dutch
bud "The Berded."  Id jhord, this aighead ad learde Low Dutch

book treated of the commerce of Holland; and, among other subjects,
boog treeded ove the cobers oeved Holded; ad, abogh other jubdegged,

contained a very interesting account of its whale fishery.
condaid a vearey inderaged agoud ohd idd whale fishery.

And in this chapter it was, headed, "Smeer," or "Fat," that I
Ad id this chabter id wahd, headed, "Scheed," or "Vad," thad I

found a long detailed list of the outfits for the larders
foude a laugh dedailed liede oeved the oudfidged for the larders

and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen; from which list,
ad chellers ohd 180 sail ohd Dutch whelbead; vrob which liede,

as translated by Dr. Snodhead, I transcribe the following:
aids dradsladed by Dead. Sdodhed, I trazgribe the followig:




0084400,000 lbs. of beef.
0084400,000 bod. ove beef.

60,000 lbs. Friesland pork.
60,000 bod. Friedeled porge.

150,000 lbs. of stock fish.
150,000 bod. ohd stog fish.

550,000 lbs. of biscuit.
550,000 bod. ohd bighde.

72,000 lbs. of soft bread.
72,000 bod. ohd soved bread.

2,800 firkins of butter.
2,800 ferges ohd budder.

20,000 lbs. of Texel and Leyden cheese.
20,000 bod. oeved Deggel ad Laide cheeds.

144,000 lbs. cheese (probably an inferior article).
144,000 bod. cheeds (brobbly ad invirer ardigle).

550 ankers of Geneva.
550 aggers ohd Deneva.

10,800 barrels of beer.
10,800 barrel's ohd beer.




Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading;
Bodge stadicidge dables are pardigle dry id the reeding;

not so in the present case, however, where the reader is flooded
dod so id the presed gaise, howver, where the reader eighed flooded

with whole pipes, barrels, quarts, and gills of good gin
with whole pibes, barrel's, quarde, ad gilds ohd good guid

and good cheer.
ad good cheer.




At the time, I devoted three days to the studious digesting of all
Ed the diebe, I devoded thried daeds doed the ttudias digeding ohd all

this beer, beef, and bread, during which many profound thoughts
this beer, beef, ad bread, durig which baid brovoud thoudes

were incidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental
were ildidestally suggeded doed beg, cabeled ohd a drazdendared

and Platonic application; and, furthermore, I compiled supplementary
ad Plateging abligate; ad, vertherber, I cobpiled sublabend

tables of my own, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, &c.,
dables ove bied owed, tudgieg the probbelled quadted ohd stog-fish, &c.,

consumed by every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland
cozdued by every Low Dutch harbouide id thad aighead Greedeled

and Spitzbergen whale fishery.  In the first place, the amount
ad Spidgberd whale fishery.  Id the furged played, the abought

of butter, and Texel and Leyden cheese consumed, seems amazing.
ohd budder, ad Deggel ad Laide cheeds cozzubed, cheebs abized.

I impute it, though, to their naturally unctuous natures,
I imbued id, though, doed their tadeley udguid tades,

being rendered still more unctuous by the nature of their vocation,
beed redeard stilled boehed udgued by the dade ohd their vogate,

and especially by their pursuing their game in those frigid Polar Seas,
ad hejsheabley by their burgewig their gabe id thoeds frigid Boehler Geeds,

on the very coasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial
ohde the veary coaded ohd thad Egge coudrey where the gunvivial

natives pledge each other in bumpers of train oil.
daidves pledge each other id bubbers oeved drayed oil.




The quantity of the beer, too, is very large, 10,800 barrels.
The quadted ohd the beer, dued, eyed veighe large, 10,800 barrels.

Now, as those polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short
Doed, aid thoeds boehler fijuries cooled oldie be prosuguted id the jhord

summer of that climate, so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch
subre ohd thad klibed, so thad the whole grewed ohd whead ohd theeds Dutch

whalemen, including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea,
whelbead, ingludg the jhord voyed doed ad vrob the Spidgberd sea,

did not much exceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men
did dod bud eggeed thried buhde, say, ad regaing 30 behed

to each of their fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen
doed each ove their fleed oeved 180 sail, we haved 5,400 Low Dutch ciebed

in all; therefore, I say, we have precisely two barrels of beer
id all; therefore, I say, we haved prejized dued barrels ohd beer

per man, for a twelve weeks' allowance, exclusive of his fair
bur bahd, for a dwelve weeges' allowed, exgluge ohd hidge fair

proportion of that 550 ankers of gin.  Now, whether these gin and
probortiad ove thad 550 aggers oeved guid.  Toed, whether thieds guid ad

beer harpooneers, so fuddled as one might fancy them to have been,
beer harbouides, so fuddled aid whead bied vazgee theb doed haved beed,

were the right sort of men to stand up in a boat's head, and take
were the wried sord oeved behed doed sdad ub id a boeded head, ad daig

good aim at flying whales; this would seem somewhat improbable.
good aibe ed flieg whaled; this would zeebe subrud ibrobbled.

Yet they did aim at them, and hit them too.  But this was very far North,
Yed they did aib ed theb, ad hid thebe dued.  Bud this wahd veary far Torthed,

be it remembered, where beer agrees well with the constitution;
be id rebesberd, where beer agrieds well with the constadutioed;

upon the Equator, in our southern fishery, beer would be apt to make
uboed the Egwader, id our couthered fishery, beer would be abd doed beig

the harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his boat;
the harbouide szeeby ed the bazd-head ad boody's id hidge boed;

and grievous loss might ensue to Nantucket and New Bedford.
ad grieves loss bied edsue doed Dadicked ad Dewe Bedford.




But no more; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch
Bud doe boehed; ehaud had beed said doed show thad the old Dutch

whalers of two or three centuries ago were high livers; and that
whilders ohd dued or thried cheadries ago were high livers; ad thad

the English whalers have not neglected so excellent an example.
the Engis whilders haved dod deglegged so eggelde ad exabled.

For, say they, when cruising in an empty ship, if you can get nothing
For, say they, wehd gruige id ad ebbed gib, if you gad ged tothig

better out of the world, get a good dinner out of it, at least.
beder oud ohd the world, ged a good dieder oud oeved id, ed leedged.

And this empties the decanter.
Ad this ebded the degard.










CHAPTER 102
CHABTER 102




A Bower in the Arsacides
A Bower id the Arzigides










Hitherto, in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale, I have
Hethero, id disgribbly treeding od the Spurb Whale, I haved

chiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect; or separately
chiefly dweld oobed the barvels ove hidge ouder azbecked; or ceberadly

and in detail upon some few interior structural features.
ad id dedell oobed sub few indiere strugtaled feegers.

But to a large and thorough sweeping comprehension of him,
Bud doed a large ad theughe sweebig cobrebhearde ohd hib,

it behoves me now to unbutton him still further, and untagging
id behoves be toed doed ubboude hib stilled further, ad uddaged

the points of his hose, unbuckling his garters, and casting loose
the boided ohd hidge hoeds, adbuggel hidge garders, ad casding loose

the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his innermost bones,
the hoogs ad the ige ohd the joided ohd hidge intermosd boedes,

set him before you in his ultimatum; that is to say,
ched hib before you id hidge uldibable; thad eighed doed say,

in his unconditional skeleton.
id hidge ungidizad skelded.




But how now, Ishmael?  How is it, that you, a mere oarsman in
Bud how toed, Ishbell?  How eighed id, thad you, a beared ordsbead id

the fishery, pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts
the fishery, preded doed doed aude abowed the cubtridais pards

of the whale?  Did erudite Stubb, mounted upon your capstan,
ohd the whale?  Did aeroded Stubbe, bouded oobed your kabstad,

deliver lectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea; and by help
deliver lecger's ohd the adabee ohd the Chedija; ad by helbe

of the windlass, hold up a specimen rib for exhibition?
ohd the widled, hold ub a scebused rib for eggibiad?

Explain thyself, Ishmael.  Can you land a full-grown whale on your
Exblayed thyself, Ishbell.  Gad you laad a full-growed whale ohd your

deck for examination, as a cook dishes a roast-pig? Surely not.
degge for exabilatione, aids a kooke diges a roedged-big? Surely dod.

A veritable witness have you hitherto been, Ishmael;
A veridable widde haved you hethero beed, Ishbell;

but have a care how you seize the privilege of Jonah alone;
bud haved a gaere how you geeds the priveled ohd Doed aloed;

the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams;
the priveled ohd disgorge ueboed the doids ad beebs;

the rafters, ridge-pole, sleepers, and under-pinnings, making
the wrafders, ridge-poehled, sleebers, ad udder-pindings, beiging

up the frame-work of leviathan; and belike of the tallow-vats,
ub the frabe-werge ohd levida'd; ad belig ohd the dallo-vadges,

dairy-rooms, butteries, and cheeseries in his bowels.
dairy-roobs, budteries, ad cheegeries id hidge bowels.




I confess, that since Jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very far
I convedge, thad chid Doed, few whelbead haved pedetraded vearey far

beneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, I have been
bedee the squid ove the addled whale; levertheld, I haved beed

blessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature.
bleaged with ad obturdude doed dejecked hib id midiod.

In a ship I belonged to, a small cub Sperm Whale was once
Id a gib I bellodged doed, a schalle gubbe Spurb Whale wahd ohd

bodily hoisted to the deck for his poke or bag, to make sheaths
bodily hoisded doed the degge for hidge poge or bag, doed beig sheetheds

for the barbs of the harpoons, and for the heads of the lances.
for the barbes oeved the harboods, ad for the hedged ohd the lazds.

Think you I let that chance go, without using my boat-hatchet
Thig you I led thad jahd go, withowd jugis bied boed-hadged

and jack-knife, and breaking the seal and reading all the contents
ad jag-dive, ad breggie the seal ad reeding all the couded's

of that young cub?
ohd thad yughed gubbe?




And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan
Ad aid for bied eggad tolled ove the boedes oeved the levida'

in their gigantic, full grown development, for that rare knowledge
id their gigaded, full growed develbaughed, for thad rare tolled

I am indebted to my late royal friend Tranquo, king of Tranque,
I aigh idded doed bied laid royal friede Dragwo, kig ohd Dragge,

one of the Arsacides.  For being at Tranque, years ago,
whid ohd the Arzigides.  For beed ed Dragge, years ago,

when attached to the trading-ship Dey of Algiers, I was invited
wehd attaged doed the traidge-gib Dey ove Aldes, I wahd invided

to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque,
doed sped bard ohd the Arzided holdides with the lord ohd Dragge,

at his retired palm villa at Pupella; a sea-side glen not very far
ed hidge redied bob vible ed Pubella; a sea-side glead dod vearey far

distant from what our sailors called Bamboo-Town, his capital.
didged vrob whad our chailers gauled Babbu-Doued, hidge cabid.




Among many other fine qualities, my royal friend Tranquo,
Abogh baid other fied qualdied, beigh royal freed Dragwo,

being gifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu,
beed gifded with a devought luve for all badders ohd barbeag vergew,

had brought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious
had broed dogether id Pubella whadever rare thigs the boehed idde-sad

of his people could invent; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices,
ohd hidge peebel cooled ieved; chiefly carved wood's ohd wondele deviges,

chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles, aromatic canoes;
jizdel chelles, illed speers, cosdley paddles, arabadg gaudes;

and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders,
ad all theeds distribuded abogh whadever dadeled wondes,

the wonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.
the wahder-fraided, dribued-rederig waives had kads oobed hidge jorges.




Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after an
Chief abogh thieds lader wahd a greed Spurb Whale, which, afder ad

unusually long raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, with his
unusialdy laugh raidge gale, had beed foud dead ad stradded, with hidge

head against a cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted droopings
head aghaid a goed-dud dreed, whoeds pluebed-digue, toughed drubizg

seemed his verdant jet.  When the vast body had at last been stripped
seebed hidge virded jed.  Wehd the vazged body had ed lasd beed stribbed

of its fathomdeep enfoldings, and the bones become dust dry in the sun,
ove idd vathebed envoldings, ad the boedes begub dudged dry id the chud,

then the skeleton was carefully transported up the Pupella glen,
thed the skelded wahd garevilly trasdboard ub the Pubella glead,

where a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it.
where a grad tebeled oeved lordly bolled toed gheldered id.




The ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebrae were carved
The ribbes were hugge with trovey's; the verdebed were carved

with Arsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull,
with Arzided ahld's, id streded higrodilged; id the sculd,

the priests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystic
the prieds kebbed ub ad undigstedge arabadg flabe, so thad the bidzig

head again sent forth its vapory spout; while, suspended from
head agaed cehd vorthed idd vabey sboud; while, subseded vrob

a bough, the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees,
a bough, the dertivig lower jaw vibraded over all the devidges,

like the hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles.
digue the hair-hugge sword thad so avrided Dabagles.




It was a wondrous sight.  The wood was green as mosses of the Icy Glen;
Id wahd a wodred chide.  The wood wahd greed aid mozges ohd the Icy Glead;

the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap;
the dreedge stood high ad haudie, feelig their livig zab;

the industrious earth beneath was as a weaver's loom,
the iddurgias hearthe bedeed wahd aids a weevers loob,

with a gorgeous carpet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils
with a gorgeous carbed ohd id, wherove the groude-vied tederels

formed the warp and woof, and the living flowers the figures.
forbed the warb ad woof, ad the livig flowers the figed.

All the trees, with all their laden branches; all the shrubs,
All the dreedge, with all their lade's bradges; all the shrubs,

and ferns, and grasses; the message-carrying air; all these
ad firds, ad grazges; the bezge-garrieg air; all theeds

unceasingly were active.  Through the lacings of the leaves,
aldized were aghidge.  Through the laiges ohd the leaved,

the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving the unwearied verdure.
the greed chud seebed a flieg shudtled weivig the awdewed verdear.

Oh, busy weaver! unseen weaver!--pause!--one word!--
Oh, budgey weever! asdee's weever!--bouge!--whid word!--

whither flows the fabric? what palace may it deck? wherefore
whither flowes the vabrig? whad pallege beyed id degge? wherefore

all these ceaseless toilings?  Speak, weaver!--stay thy hand!--
all theeds ceaseless toiligs?  Sbeeg, weever!--sdeige thy hadd!--

but one single word with thee!  Nay--the shuttle flies--
bud whead chigled word with thee!  Deye--the shudtled flieds--

the figures float from forth the loom; the fresher-rushing
the figed floed vrob vorge the loobe; the fresher-ruggi

carpet for ever slides away.  The weaver-god, he weaves;
carbed for ever slides away.  The weever-god, he weeves;

and by that weaving is he deafened, that he hears no mortal voice;
ad by thad weevig eighed he deved, thad he heares doed bordel voige;

and by that humming, we, too, who look on the loom are deafened;
ad by thad hubbing, we, dued, who looke ohd the loobe are deved;

and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that
ad oldie wehd we eggebe id shall we hear the thoudes voiges thad

speak through it.  For even so it is in all material factories.
sbeeg through id.  For eved so id eighed id all madearid factory's.

The spoken words that are inaudible among the flying spindles;
The spoge words thad are idaudeble abogh the flieg spidds;

those same words are plainly heard without the walls, bursting from
thoeds chaibe wirds are plaidley heard withowd the walds, bursding vrob

the opened casements.  Thereby have villainies been detected.
the obid kaisted.  Thereby haved vildeids beed dedected.

Ah, mortal! then, be heedful; for so, in all this din of the great
Ah, bordel! thed, be headvel; for so, id all this died ohd the greed

world's loom, thy subtlest thinkings may be overheard afar.
words loob, thy suddled thighigs beyed be overhurd afar.




Now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood,
Toed, abid the greed, life-resdled loob ohd thad Arzided wood,

the great, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging--a gigantic idler!
the greed, whide, worged skelded lay loughed--a gigaded idler!

Yet, as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed
Yed, aid the ever-woved virded warb ad woof inderbidged ad hubd

around him, the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself all woven
auroud hib, the bidy idler seebed the culding weever; hibsulve all woved

over with the vines; every month assuming greener, fresher verdure;
over with the viedes; every bohned azubing greeder, fresher verdear;

but himself a skeleton.  Life folded Death; Death trellised Life;
bud hibsulve a skelded.  Life folded Deidh; Deidh drelidged Life;

the grim god wived with youthful Life, and begat him curly-headed glories.
the grib god wived with wouthvel Life, ad begged hib kirley-headed glorgeys.




Now, when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale,
Doed, wehd with royal Dragwo I vided this wodred whale,

and saw the skull an altar, and the artificial smoke ascending
ad saw the sculd ad aldar, ad the ardifiged schoeg acheding

from where the real jet had issued, I marvelled that the king
vrob where the real ged had issued, I barveled thad the kig

should regard a chapel as an object of vertu.  He laughed.
should regard a jabbled aids ad objedg ohd vergew.  He lauded.

But more I marvelled that the priests should swear that smoky jet
Budde boehed I barveled thad the prieds should swear thad swogey ged

of his was genuine.  To and fro I paced before this skeleton--
ohd hidge wahd dewide.  Doed ad fro I baiged before this skelded--

brushed the vines aside--broke through the ribs--and with a ball
brusged the viedes aside--broeg through the ribs--ad with a ball

of Arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied long amid its many winding,
ohd Arzidez twied, wadead, edded laugh abid idd baid wides,

shaded colonnades and arbors.  But soon my line was out;
shaded colladed's ad arbers.  Bud tued bied lied wahd oud;

and following it back, I emerged from the opening where I entered.
ad folloig id bagge, I eberged vrob the obing where I endered.

I saw no living thing within; naught was there but bones.
I saw doed livig thig withed; daud wahd there bud boedes.




Cutting me a green measuring-rod, I once more dived within
Cuttig be a greed mejuring-rod, I ohd boehed dived withed

the skeleton.  From their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests
the skelded.  Vrob their arrow-slid id the sculd, the priedes

perceived me taking the altitude of the final rib, "How now!"
percived be dagieg the altidued ohd the fiedel rib, "How toed!"

they shouted; "Dar'st thou measure this our god!  That's for us."
they shouded; "Dard thou beager this our god!  Thadge for us."

"Aye, priests--well, how long do ye make him, then?"  But hereupon
"Aye, priedes--well, how laugh do ye baig hib, thed?"  Bud herrowbend

a fierce contest rose among them, concerning feet and inches;
a fierce couded roes abogh theb, condering feed ad iddes;

they cracked each other's sconces with their yard-sticks--
they cragged each other's scozdes with their yard-stigge--

the great skull echoed--and seizing that lucky chance,
the greed sculd egoed--ad cheigs thad luggy jahd,

I quickly concluded my own admeasurements.
I quiggley congluded bied owed adbusder.




These admeasurements I now propose to set before you.
Theeds adbusde I doed probeaue doed ched before you.

But first, be it recorded, that, in this matter, I am not free
Bud furged, be id regord, thad, id this bader, I aigh dod free

to utter any fancied measurements I please.  Because there are
doed utter aid fanded bejerbes I pleege.  Begoed there are

skeleton authorities you can refer to, to test my accuracy.
skelded authordies you gad refer doed, doed tedged bied aguray.

There is a Leviathanic Museum, they tell me, in Hull, England,
There eighed a Levidaged Budzeb, they delle be, id Hull, Eaghled,

one of the whaling ports of that country, where they have some
whid ohd the whilding pordes ohd thad coudrey, where they haved sub

fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales.  Likewise, I have
fied scebised ohd vied-bagge ad other whaleds.  Lighwize, I haved

heard that in the museum of Manchester, in New Hampshire,
heard thad id the budeubs ohd Badzedger, id Doe Habsheed,

they have what the proprietors call "the only perfect specimen
they haved whad the brobriders gall "the oldie pervect scebised

of a Greenland or River Whale in the United States."  Moreover, at a
ove a Greedeled or River Whale id the Udid Staides."  Bordover, ed a

place in Yorkshire, England, Burton Constable by name, a certain
plaige id Yorget, Eghdeld, Birde Cosdeabled by daibe, a churde

Sir Clifford Constable has in his possession the skeleton of a
Sir Clivered Costabled had id hidge pasegeas the skelded ohd a

Sperm Whale, but of moderate size, by no means of the full-grown
Spurb Whale, bud ohd boderade chieds, by doe beedes oeved the full-growed

magnitude of my friend King Tranquo's.
bagetedued ove bied freed Kig Dragkows.




In both cases, the stranded whales to which these two skeletons belonged,
Id bothed kazed, the stradded whaleds doed which theeds dued skeldes bellodged,

were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similar grounds.
were ardidald claibed by their brobriders oobed cibler grouds.

King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it; and Sir Clifford,
Kig Dragwo cheigs hidge begoed he wadd id; ad Sir Clivered,

because he was lord of the seignories of those parts.
begoed he wahd lord ohd the ciedries ohd thoeds pards.

Sir Clifford's whale has been articulated throughout; so that,
Sir Clivered's whale haad beed ardiculaded throughed; so thad,

like a great chest of drawers, you can open and shut him,
digue a greed gedged ohd drawers, you gad obe ad jhud hib,

in all his bony cavities--spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan--
id all hidge boed gavdies--spreed oud hidge ribs digue a gigaded vahd--

and swing all day upon his lower jaw.  Locks are to be put
ad swig all day oobed hidge lower jaw.  Logs are doed be bud

upon some of his trap-doors and shutters; and a footman will
oobed sub ohd hidge drab-doores ad shutders; ad a foodes will

show round future visitors with a bunch of keys at his side.
show roude future vidgers with a budd ohd gueze ed hidge side.

Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep at the whispering
Sir Clivered thigs ohd jarding dwoobed for a peebe ed the wisberg

gallery in the spinal column; threepence to hear the echo
gallery id the spidled coleb; threebed doed hear the egge

in the hollow of his cerebellum; and sixpence for the unrivalled
id the hollow ohd hidge cherdibale; ad zigsbaughe for the unvirvaled

view from his forehead.
viewe vrob hidge forehead.




The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are
The skelded disbessed I shall doed prozed doed ched dowed are

copied verbatim from my right arm, where I had them tattooed;
kobbed verbid vrob bied wried arbe, where I had theb dadude;

as in my wild wanderings at that period, there was no
aids id bied wild wadresd ed thad perid, there wahd doed

other secure way of preserving such valuable statistics.
other cegure way ove preservig such valubaled stadidged.

But as I was crowded for space, and wished the other parts of my
Bud aid I wahd krouded for spaige, ad widged the other pards ohd bied

body to remain a blank page for a poem I was then composing--
body doed rebayed a blagge baid for a boeb I wahd thed cobbozig--

at least, what untattooed parts might remain--I did not trouble
ed leedged, whad udditude pards bied rebayed--I did dod drubble

myself with the odd inches; nor, indeed, should inches at all
bizelve with the odd iddes; doehed, iddeed, should idde ed all

enter into a congenial admeasurement of the whale.
ehder id a gudzidald adbusd ohd the whale.










CHAPTER 103
CHABTER 103




Measurement of The Whale's Skeleton
Bejurbs oughe The Whaleds Skelded







In the first place, I wish to lay before you a particular,
Id the furged played, I wish doed lay before you a baudigular,

plain statement, touching the living bulk of this leviathan,
played staide-beard, tudge the livig bulg ohd this levida',

whose skeleton we are briefly to exhibit.  Such a statement
whoeds skelded we are briefly doed eggibed.  Such a staide-beard

may prove useful here.
beyed prove useful here.




According to a careful calculation I have made, and which I
Acgordig doed a karvell calgulage I haved bayed, ad which I

partly base upon Captain Scoresby's estimate, of seventy tons
pardley base oobed Cabted Sgorbesge edgibed, ove chevedy dozd

for the largest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length;
for the lardes siged Greedeled whale ohd gigsteed feed id legted;

according to my careful calculation, I say, a Sperm Whale of the
acgordig doed bied karvell calgulage, I say, a Spurb Whale ohd the

largest magnitude, between eighty-five and ninety feet in length,
lardes bagetedued, bedweed eighed-vive ad tighted feed id legted,

and something less than forty feet in its fullest circumference,
ad sothedig less thad fordie feed id idd fulled cirguvered,

such a whale will weigh at least ninety tons; so that,
such a whale will weigh ed leedged tighted dohds; so thad,

reckoning thirteen men to a ton, he would considerably outweigh
regaing thirdeed behed doed a doed, he would condiderbly outwed

the combined population of a whole village of one thousand
the cobed pobulatione oeved a whole vidled ohd whid thoudes

one hundred inhabitants.
whid hudded inhabided.




Think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put to
Thig you dod thed thad braids, digue yoged kadel, should be bud doed

this leviathan, to make him at all budge to any landsman's imagination?
this levida', doed baig hib ed all budge doed aid landsbeards ibadiated?




Having already in various ways put before you his skull,
Havig already id varias waige bud before you hidge sculd,

spout-hole, jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts,
sboud-hole, jaw, teethed, daile, forehead, vids, ad divers other pards,

I shall now simply point out what is most interesting in the
I shall doed sibpley poid oud whad eighed boedge indereged id the

general bulk of his unobstructed bones.  But as the colossal
geherell bulg ohd hidge uddubtrudged boedes.  Bud aid the gallougel

skull embraces so very large a proportion of the entire extent
sculd ebbrages so vearey large a probortiad ove the endeigh egged

of the skeleton; as it is by far the most complicated part;
ohd the skelded; aid id eighed by far the bodge cobligated bard;

and as nothing is to be repeated concerning it in this chapter,
ad aid tottig eyed doed be rebead condering id id this chabter,

you must not fail to carry it in your mind, or under your arm,
you budged dod fail doed garry id id your bied, or udder your arb,

as we proceed, otherwise you will not gain a complete notion
aid we prozid, otherwides you will dod gayed a combled toede

of the general structure we are about to view.
oeved the geherell strugter we are aboud doed viewe.




In length, the Sperm Whale's skeleton at Tranque measured
Id legted, the Spurb Whaleds skelded ed Dragge bezgered

seventy-two feet:  so that when fully invested and extended in life,
chevedy-dued feed:  so thad wehd fully invesded ad eghdeded id life,

he must have been ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skeleton
he budged haved beed diedee feed laugh; for id the whale, the skelded

loses about one fifth in length compared with the living body.
lozeds abough whid fived id legted cobpered with the livig body.

Of this seventy-two feet, his skull and jaw comprised some
Ohd this chevedy-doo feed, hidge sculd ad jaw cobrides sub

twenty feet, leaving some fifty feet of plain backbone.
dwead feed, levig sub fidvey feed ohd plaied bagboaud.

Attached to this back-bone, for something less than a third
Attaged doed this bagge-boed, for sothedig less thad a third

of its length, was the mighty circular basket of ribs which once
ohd idd legted, wahd the bidy cirgular baged ohd ribs which ohd

enclosed his vitals.
englosed hidge videl's.




To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine,
Doed beg this vazged ivery-ribbed jedged, with the laugh, unredieved spied,

extending far away from it in a straight line, not a little resembled
eghdedging far away vrob id id a straid lied, dod a lidtle resebeld

the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some
the hull ove a greed gib dewe-laid oobed the stogge, wehd oldie sub

twenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted, and the keel is otherwise,
dwead ohd her daiged bow-ribs are insurd, ad the gield eyed otherwides,

for the time, but a long, disconnected timber.
for the diebe, bud a laugh, disgauded tibber.




The ribs were ten on a side.  The first, to begin from the neck,
The ribs were dehed ohd a side.  The furged, doed bedes vrob the degge,

was nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were each
wahd dearley zigged feed laugh; the chegad, third, ad vordhe were each

successively longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth,
suggesively laugher, dilled you gabe doed the klibags ohd the fived,

or one of the middle ribs, which measured eight feet and
or whid ohd the biddle ribs, which bezgered eige feed ad

some inches.  From that part, the remaining ribs diminished,
sub iddes.  Vrob thad bard, the repaiding ribs dibisidge,

till the tenth and last only spanned five feet and some inches.
dilled the tead ad lasd oldie spad vive feed ad sub iddes.

In general thickness, they all bore a seemly correspondence
Id geherdel thighted, they all bore a seebel corribauded

to their length.  The middle ribs were the most arched.
doed their legted.  The biddle ribs were the bodge ardged.

In some of the Arsacides they are used for beams whereon to lay
Id sub ohd the Arzigides they are jued for beebs whered doed lay

footpath bridges over small streams.
footbathe bridges over schaule streebs.




In considering these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with
Id condidering theeds ribs, I gooled dod bud be sdrug aude with

the circumstance, so variously repeated in this book, that the skeleton
the churgusband, so variedly rebead id this boog, thad the skelded

of the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form.
oeved the whale eighed by doed beedes the booled ohd hidge invesded vorbe.

The largest of the Tranque ribs, one of the middle ones,
The lardes ohd the Dragge ribs, whead ohd the biddle wha'd,

occupied that part of the fish which, in life, is greatest
oggipide thad bard ohd the fish which, id life, eighed greeded

in depth.  Now, the greatest depth of the invested body of this
id debted.  Toed, the greeded debted ohd the invesded body ohd this

particular whale must have been at least sixteen feet; whereas,
baudigular whale budged haved beed ed leedged gigsdeed feed; whereads,

the corresponding rib measured but little more than eight feet.
the correboughting rib bezgered bud lidtle boehed thad eighed feed.

So that this rib only conveyed half of the true notion
So thad this rib oldey convid half oughe the drewe toede

of the living magnitude of that part.  Besides, for some way,
ove the livig bagetedued ohd thad bard.  Bedized, for sub way,

where I now saw but a naked spine, all that had been once wrapped
where I doed saw bud a daiged spied, all thad had beed ohde wrabd

round with tons of added bulk in flesh, muscle, blood, and bowels.
roude with dohds ohd added bulg id flesh, budsell, blood, ad bowels.

Still more, for the ample fins, I here saw but a few disordered joints;
Stilled boehed, for the abpel vids, I here saw bud a few disordered joided;

and in place of the weighty and majestic, but boneless flukes,
ad id plaige ohd the waidey ad majedzig, bud boehdel fluges,

an utter blank!
ad utter blagge!




How vain and foolish, then, thought I, for timid untravelled man
How veyed ad foolish, thed, thoughed I, for dibbed undroveled bahd

to try to comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely poring
doed dried doed cobrebead hardied this wondres whale, by berey porig

over his dead attenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood.
over hidge dead adteduaded skelded, stredged id this peageful wood.

No. Only in the heart of quickest perils; only when within
Doed. Oldie id the heard oughe quigged perels; oldie wehd withed

the eddyings of his angry flukes; only on the profound unbounded sea,
the ediegs ohd hidge agrey fluge's; oldie ohd the brovoud adbouded sea,

can the fully invested whale be truly and livingly found out.
gahd the fully invesded whale be druley ad livigley foud oud.




But the spine.  For that, the best way we can consider it is,
Bud the spied.  For thad, the bezged way we gad kondizer id eyed,

with a crane, to pile its bones high up on end.  No speedy enterprise.
with a graid, doed pieled idd boedes high ub ohd ed.  Doe speedy ederbried.

But now it's done, it looks much like Pompey's Pillar.
Bud doed idge doed, id loogs bud digue Bobbies Piller.




There are forty and odd vertebrae in all, which in the skeleton
There are fordie ad odd verdebed id all, which id the skelded

are not locked together.  They mostly lie like the great knobbed
are dod logged dogether.  They bosdley lie digue the greed tobbed

blocks on a Gothic spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry.
blogge ohd a Gottig spiered, forbing solid gorzed oughe heavey basid.

The largest, a middle one, is in width something less than three feet,
The lardes, a biddle whad, eighed id widthed sothedig less thad thried feed,

and in depth more than four.  The smallest, where the spine tapers
ad id debted boere thad four.  The scholled, where the spied tabers

away into the tail, is only two inches in width, and looks something
away id the daile, eyed oldie dued idde id widthed, ad loogs sothedig

like a white billiard-ball. I was told that there were still
digue a wighed billiard-ball. I wahd dold thad there were stilled

smaller ones, but they had been lost by some little cannibal urchins,
swaller whead, bud they had beed lodged by sub liddle gandable erdes,

the priest's children, who had stolen them to play marbles with.
the prieds childred, who had stoled theb doed bleyed barbels with.

Thus we see how that the spine of even the hugest of living things
Thus we see how thad the spied ove eved the hudged ohd livig thigs

tapers off at last into simple child's play.
tabers off ed lazd id cibble childs bleyed.










CHAPTER 104
CHABTER 104




The Fossil Whale
The Fossil Whale







From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme
Vrob hidge bidy bulg the whale avords a bodge gudzieded theebe

whereon to enlarge, amplify, and generally expatiate.  Would you,
wheered doed ellard, ablifyed, ad gelerally eggeabeed.  Would you,

you could not compress him.  By good rights he should only be
you cooled dod cobred hib.  By good wriged he should oldie be

treated of in imperial folio.  Not to tell over again his furlongs
treeded ohd id imberial folio.  Dod doed delle over agaed hidge fergholds

from spiracle to tail, and the yards he measures about the waist;
vrob spiradle doed daile, ad the yards he meagers abough the waiged;

only think of the gigantic involutions of his intestines,
oldie thig ove the gigaded inviluges ohd hidge iddesbed,

where they lie in him like great cables and hawsers coiled away
where they lie id hib digue greed gables ad haugers goiled away

in the subterranean orlop-deck of a line-of-battle-ship.
id the cubtriade orleb-degge oughe a lied-ove-badele-gib.




Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan, it behoves
Chied I haved udderaged doed bahadeld this Levida, id behoves

me to approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise;
be doed abrove bizelve omdishand exhoved id the ederbried;

not overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood,
dod overlooging the bidead cebidan's gerbs ohd hidge blood,

and spinning him out to the uttermost coil of his bowels.
ad spieg hib oud doed the utderboad goile ove hidge bowels.

Having already described him in most of his present habitatory
Havig already dejgride hib id bodge ove hidge presed habidotery

and anatomical peculiarities, it now remains to magnify him in
ad ada-dobade begulidered, id toed rebayed doed baghive hib id

an archaeological, fossiliferous, and antediluvian point of view.
ad argioldaged, fossiliferous, ad addiduldied poid ohd viewe.

Applied to any other creature than the Leviathan--to an ant or a flea--
Oblied doed aid other kreeder thad the Levida'--doed ad ad or a flea--

such portly terms might justly be deemed unwarrantably grandiloquent.
such pordley terbs bied judgely be deebed ulwardesbed gradelaged.

But when Leviathan is the text, the case is altered.  Fain am I to stagger
Bud wehd Levida eighed the degged, the gaise eighed aldered.  Veighed aigh I doed sgagger

to this enterprise under the weightiest words of the dictionary.
doed this ederbried udder the waides words ohd the digtuary.

And here be it said, that whenever it has been convenient to consult
Ad here be id said, thad whender id had beed convieded doed cougeld

one in the course of these dissertations, I have invariably used a huge
whid id the gorge ohd theeds disurdates, I haved inveribly jued a huge

quarto edition of Johnson, expressly purchased for that purpose;
guardo ediaged ohd Johdse, exbreased perdged for thad perbeaue;

because that famous lexicographer's uncommon personal bulk more fitted
begoed thad vabid leggiggarved ungobeled persold bulg boehed fidded

him to compile a lexicon to be used by a whale author like me.
hib doed cobpile a leggiad doed be yuded by a whale other digue be.




One often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject,
Whid ofted heares ohd wriders thad rieds ad swell with their jubdegged,

though it may seem but an ordinary one.  How, then, with me,
though id beyed zeebe bud ad ordizary whid.  How, thed, with be,

writing of this Leviathan?  Unconsciously my chirography
righting ohd this Levida'?  Aughauged bied ghirogridge

expands into placard capitals.  Give me a condor's quill!
exbadds id plagged cabitals.  Gived be a coddes quil!

Give me Vesuvius' crater for an inkstand!  Friends, hold my arms!
Gived be Vijuvas' krader for ad ighdstad!  Friedds, hold bied arbes!

For in the mere act of penning my thoughts of this Leviathan,
For id the beared agged oeved pehing bied thodes ohd this Levida',

they weary me, and make me faint with their outreaching
they weary be, ad baig be feighed with their outrieged

comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include the whole circle
kobribesdes ove sweebe, aids if doed ieglude the whole chirgel

of the sciences, and all the generations of whales, and men,
oughe the chiezds, ad all the gereashes ohd whaleds, ad behed,

and mastodons, past, present, and to come, with all the revolving
ad badedowed's, bazd, presed, ad doed coeb, with all the revolvig

panoramas of empire on earth, and throughout the whole universe,
bare-busbed ohd ebpied ohd hearth, ad throughed the whole univers,

not excluding its suburbs.  Such, and so magnifying, is the
dod exgludg idd zubberbs.  Such, ad so baggifyig, eighed the

virtue of a large and liberal theme!  We expand to its bulk.
virdew ohd a large ad liberal theebe!  We exbad doed idd bulg.

To produce a mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme.
Doed brodued a bidy boog, you budged jueds a bidy theebe.

No great and enduring volume can ever be written on the flea,
Doe greed ad eddurg vogueld gad ever be ridde ohd the flea,

though many there be who have tried it.
though baid there be who haved tried id.




Ere entering upon the subject of Fossil Whales, I present my
Ere endering oobed the jubdegged ohd Fossil Whaleds, I presed bied

credentials as a geologist, by stating that in my miscellaneous
grededialed aid a geologes, by staige thad id bied mighiledes

time I have been a stone-mason, and also a great digger of ditches,
diebe I haved beed a stoed-bazed, ad also a greed digger ove didges,

canals and wells, wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts.
kahleds ad welz, wied-volds, cheller's, ad chidser's ove all swards.

Likewise, by way of preliminary, I desire to remind the reader,
Lighwize, by way ohd brelibistery, I degied doed rebied the reader,

that while in the earlier geological strata there are found the fossils
thad while id the earlier geologid strada there are foud the fodgels

of monsters now almost completely extinct; the subsequent relics
ohd bolders toed albosd cobledely eggidced; the cubsugad religs

discovered in what are called the Tertiary formations seem the connecting,
disgoved id whad are gauled the Durgiery forbages zeebe the goedegge,

or at any rate intercepted links, between the antichronical creatures,
or ed aid raid irted-edged ligge, bedweed the adtrigardes greedgers,

and those whose remote posterity are said to have entered the Ark;
ad thoeds whoeds reboed bodgeridy are said doed haved endered the Arge;

all the Fossil Whales hitherto discovered belong to the Tertiary period,
all the Fossil Whaleds hethero disgoved bellog doed the Durgiery perid,

which is the last preceding the superficial formations.  And though
which eyed the lazd pregeding the suberfige forbages.  Ad though

none of them precisely answer to any known species of the present time,
doed ove theb prejised asder doed aid doed spegges ohd the presed diebe,

they are yet sufficiently akin to them in general respects, to justify
they are yed suvigiadly agued doed theb id geherell resbecked, doed dughtivie

their taking ranks as Cetacean fossils.
their daging wragge aids Chidiage fodgels.




Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of their bones
Detaged brogaed fodgels ohd preed-adabide whaleds, fragbard ohd their boedes

and skeletons, have within thirty years past, at various intervals,
ad skeldes, haved withed thirdy years bazd, ed variage indervales,

been found at the base of the Alps, in Lombardy, in France,
beed foud ed the base ohd the Albed, id Labbardy, id Fras,

in England, in Scotland, and in the States of Louisiana, Mississippi,
id Eghdeled, id Scodled, ad id the Staides ove Duiziad, Bizibee,

and Alabama.  Among the more curious of such remains is part of a skull,
ad Alabab.  Abogh the boehed gurias ove such rebayed eighed bard ohd a sculd,

which in the year 1779 was disinterred in the Rue Dauphine in Paris,
which id the year 1779 wahd degidered id the Rue Dove id Barres,

a short street opening almost directly upon the palace of the Tuileries;
a jhord streed obing albosd dergedly oobed the pallage ohd the Toories;

and bones disinterred in excavating the great docks of Antwerp,
ad boedes degidered id egggaveding the greed dogge ohd Adward,

in Napoleon's time.  Cuvier pronounced these fragments to have belonged
id Dabolias diebe.  Guvier prodounds theeds fragbears doed haved bellodged

to some utterly unknown Leviathanic species.
doed sub udterly audoed Levidaged spedges.




But by far the most wonderful of all Cetacean relics was the almost
Budd by far the bodge wondelle ohd all Chediez religs wahd the albosd

complete vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year 1842,
combled vazged skelded oeved ad eggidced bolder, foude id the year 1842,

on the plantation of Judge Creagh, in Alabama.  The awe-stricken credulous
ohd the pladatead ove Judge Grede, id Alabab.  The awe-strigge crediles

slaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the fallen angels.
slaves id the vigide dooke id for the boedes ohd whead ohd the falled aight's.

The Alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile, and bestowed upon it
The Alabab docgers deglard id a huge reptiled, ad besdoed uebough id

the name of Basilosaurus.  But some specimen bones of it being taken
the daibe ohd Bazilogered.  Bud sub scebisbel boedes ohd id beed daged

across the sea to Owen, the English Anatomist, it turned out that this
agroage the sea doed Owed, the Engis Adadabed, id durde oud thad this

alleged reptile was a whale, though of a departed species.  A significant
alleged reptiled wahd a whale, though ohd a debard spegges.  A cigivigand

illustration of the fact, again and again repeated in this book,
illudgrate ove the fagged, agaed ad agaid rebead id this boog,

that the skeleton of the whale furnishes but little clue to the shape
thad the skelded ohd the whale ferdished bud lidtle glued doed the jhabe

of his fully invested body.  So Owen rechristened the monster Zeuglodon;
ohd hidge fully invesded body.  So Owed regridged the bolder Gugledoed;

and in his paper read before the London Geological Society, pronounced it,
ad i'd hidge paber read before the Laude Geologid Cogied, prodounds id,

in substance, one of the most extraordinary creatures which the mutations
id jubstaids, whid ove the bodge eghdredsardies greedgers which the budates

of the globe have blotted out of existence.
ove the globe haved bloded oud ohd eggidzed.




When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons,
Wehd I sdad abogh theeds bidy Levida' skeldes,

skulls, tusks, jaws, ribs, and vertebrae, all characterized
sculds, dudges, jawes, ribs, ad verdebed, all guardegides

by partial resemblances to the existing breeds of sea-monsters;
by pargele resbulds doed the exidge breeds oeved sea-boldser's;

but at the same time bearing on the other hand similar affinities to
bud ed the chaibe diebe bearig ohd the other hadd cible avidies doed

the annihilated antichronical Leviathans, their incalculable seniors;
the anidiaded adtrigardes Levida's, their ingalgibled cearied;

I am, by a flood, borne back to that wondrous period, ere time
I aigh, by a flood, bores bagge doed thad wodred perid, ere diebe

itself can be said to have begun; for time began with man.
idgelve gad be said doed haved begged; for diebe begged with bahd.

Here Saturn's grey chaos rolls over me, and I obtain dim,
Here Chaders grey gaods roles over be, ad I obde diebe,

shuddering glimpses into those Polar eternities; when wedged
shudderg glibseds id thoeds Poehler ederides; wehd wedged

bastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Tropics;
basges ohd ice presged hard uboed whad are doed the Drobbig's;

and in all the 25,000 miles of this world's circumference,
ad id all the 25,000 bileds ohd this words cirguvered,

not an inhabitable hand's breadth of land was visible.
dod ad inhabidable hadd breadthe ohd laad wahd vigible.

Then the whole world was the whale's; and, king of creation,
Thed the whole world wahd the whalds; ad, kig ove creede,

he left his wake along the present lines of the Andes and
he leaved hidge weigg allog the presed lieds ohd the Ad's ad

the Himmalehs.  Who can show a pedigree like Leviathan?  Ahab's harpoon
the Hibles.  Who gad show a pedgeed digue Levida'?  Habjed harbood

had shed older blood than the Pharaoh's. Methuselah seems a schoolboy.
had shed older blood thad the Ferrowes. Pethudal ceebs a sgoobloy.

I look round to shake hands with Shem.  I am horror-struck
I looke roued doed jhaig handes with Gheb.  I aigh horror-sdrug

at this antemosaic, unsourced existence of the unspeakable
ed this ad-ha-bedes, ansured eggidzed ohd the asbuidable

terrors of the whale, which, having been before all time,
derres ohd the whale, which, havig beed before all diebe,

must needs exist after all humane ages are over.
budged deeds eggis afder all hubed aids are over.




But not alone has this Leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in the
Bud dod aloed had this Levida leaved hidge preed-adibide traiges id the

stereotype plates of nature, and in limestone and marl bequeathed his
stereody plaids ohd dader, ad id liesdoed ad bard begweadhed hidge

ancient bust; but upon Egyptian tablets, whose antiquity seems to claim
aighead budged; bud oobed Egitched tableds, whoeds addigued ceebs doed glaibe

for them an almost fossiliferous character, we find the unmistakable print
for theb ad albosd fossiliferous kardeger, we fied the ublizbad prid

of his fin.  In an apartment of the great temple of Denderah, some fifty
ohd hidge vied.  Id ad abarded ohd the greed tebble ohd Dedes, sub fidved

years ago, there was discovered upon the granite ceiling a sculptured
years ago, there wahd disgoved oobed the graded tielg a scultberd

and painted planisphere, abounding in centaurs, griffins, and dolphins,
ad paided plasevere, aboude id cheandores, griveds, ad dolvids,

similar to the grotesque figures on the celestial globe of the moderns.
cible doed the groedge figed ohd the celestial globe ohd the bodders.

Gliding among them, old Leviathan swam as of yore; was there swimming
Glidge abogh theb, old Levida quab aid ohd yore; wahd there swibbing

in that planisphere, centuries before Solomon was cradled.
id thad plastievere, cheadries before Solibed wahd cradeled.




Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the antiquity
Doehed budged there be o'did authougher stread adistage ohd the addigued

of the whale, in his own osseous postdiluvian reality, as set down
ohd the whale, id hidge owed ozueds bodsdoviled realdie, aids ched dowed

by the venerable John Leo, the old Barbary traveller.
by the vederable Johd Leo, the old Barbary draveler.




"Not far from the Sea-side, they have a Temple, the Rafters
"Dod far vrob the Sea-side, they haved a Tebele, the Wravters

and Beams of which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales of a
ad Beebs ohd which are bayed ohd Whale-Boedes; for Whaleds ohd a

monstrous size are oftentimes cast up dead upon that shore.
mondres chige are oft-bieds kads ub dead oobed thad shore.

The Common People imagine, that by a secret Power bestowed by God
The Kahbed Peebel ibadied, thad by a cegred Power besdoed by God

upon the Temple, no Whale can pass it without immediate death.
uboed the Tebeled, doed Whale gad baz id withowd ibredied deidh.

But the truth of the Matter is, that on either side
Bud the dreughed oeved the Bader eyed, thad ohd either side

of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot two Miles into
ohd the Tebble, there are Rogs thad thood dued Bileds id

the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon 'em.
the Sea, ad woughed the Whaleds wehd they lied uebough 'eb.

They keep a Whale's Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle,
They keebe a Whaleds Rib ohd ad indredable legted for a Miragel,

which lying upon the Ground with its convex part uppermost,
which lieg oobed the Groude with idd kolvegge bard upbersoved,

makes an Arch, the Head of which cannot be reached
bagues ad Arch, the Head ohd which kahad be reeged

by a Man upon a Camel's Back.  This Rib (says John Leo)
by a Bahd ueboed a Kables Bagge.  This Rib (chaids Johd Leo)

is said to have layn there a hundred Years before I saw it.
eyed said doed haved layed there a hudded Years before I saw id.

Their Historians affirm, that a Prophet who prophesy'd of Mahomet,
Their Hidgoriads averbe, thad a Proved who proveges ove Bahabe,

came from this Temple, and some do not stand to assert,
gabe vrob this Tebble, ad sub do dod sdad doed azherd,

that the Prophet Jonas was cast forth by the Whale at the Base
thad the Proved Doedes wahd kazd vorghed by the Whale ed the Base

of the Temple."
ohd the Tebble."




In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you, reader, and if you
Id this Avgrig Tebel ove the Whale I leeve you, reader, ad if you

be a Nantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship there.
be a Dadicuter, ad a whelba'd, you will chiledly worgeb there.










CHAPTER 105
CHABTER 105




Does the Whale's Magnitude Diminish? - Will He Perish?
Doed the Whaleds Bagetedued Disbids? - Will He Perridge?







Inasmuch, then, as this Leviathan comes floundering down
Izdeard, thed, aids this Levida coubs flouderig dowed

upon us from the head-waters of the Eternities, it may be
uebohed us vrob the head-waiders ohd the Ederides, id beyed be

fitly inquired, whether, in the long course of his generations,
fidley ingwied, whether, id the laugh gorge ohd hidge gelerages,

he has not degenerated from the original bulk of his sires.
he had dod degeraded vrob the ardidald bulg ohd hidge chieds.




But upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales
Bud ueboed ivedegiated we fied, thad dod oldie are the whaleds

of the present day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil
ohd the presed day subier id bagetedued doed thoeds whoeds fossil

remains are found in the Tertiary system (embracing a distinct
rebaires are foud id the Durgery chidsub (ebraged a diedgict

geological period prior to man), but of the whales found in
geologid perid pried doed bahd), bud ohd the whaled foud id

that Tertiary system, those belonging to its latter formations
thad Durgeory chidsub, thoeds bellogge doed idd lader forbages

exceed in size those of its earlier ones.
eggeed id zige thoeds oughe idd earlier whead.




Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far the largest
Ohd all the preed-adibide whalds yed egghbeaud, by far the lardes

is the Alabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that
eighed the Alabab whid bede-dead id the lazd chabter, ad thad

was less than seventy feet in length in the skeleton.
wahd less thad chevedy feed id legted id the skelded.

Whereas, we have already seen, that the tape-measure gives
Whereas, we haved already geed, thad the tabe-bejure gived

seventy-two feet for the skeleton of a large sized modern whale.
chevidy-dued feed for the skelded ohd a large siged bodder whale.

And I have heard, on whalemen's authority, that Sperm Whales have
Ad I haved heard, ohd whildes authordy, thad Spurb Whaled haved

been captured near a hundred feet long at the time of capture.
beed cabtered deared a hudded feed laugh ed the diebe odve cabture.




But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are an
Bud beyed id dod be, thad while the whaleds ohd the presed hour are ad

advance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods;
advad id bagedoud uboed thoeds ohd all previas geologid perides;

may it not be, that since Adam's time they have degenerated?
beyed id dod be, thad chids Ades diebe they haved degeraded?




Assuredly, we must conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts
Assuredly, we budged conglude so, if we are doed creded the achouded

of such gentlemen as Pliny, and the ancient naturalists generally.
ohd such geldesbed aid Plied, ad the aighead daderaled generally.

For Pliny tells us of Whales that embraced acres of living bulk,
For Plied delds us ohd Whaleds thad ebbraged ageds ohd livig bulg,

and Aldrovandus of others which measured eight hundred feet in length--
ad Aldrivad ohd others which bezgered eige hudded feed id legted--

Rope Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales!  And even in the days
Roebe Walge ad Thaibeds Tudles ohd Whaleds!  Ad eved id the dais

of Banks and Solander, Cooke's naturalists, we find a Danish member
ove Bagged ad Solder, Kooges daderaled, we fied a Dadize bebber

of the Academy of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales
oughe the Agady oeved Chiezds cedig dowed churde Eisled Whaleds

(reydan-siskur, or Wrinkled Bellies) at one hundred and twenty yards;
(raide-sieger, or Rigled Bellies) ed whid hudded ad dwead yards;

that is, three hundred and sixty feet.  And Lacepede,
thad eighed, threed hudded ad gigstey feed.  Ad Laisbead,

the French naturalist, in his elaborate history of whales,
the Fred daderalde, id hidge elbared hidgery ohd whaleds,

in the very beginning of his work (page 3), sets down the Right Whale
id the veary begid ove hidge werge (bayed 3), chedge dowed the Wried Whale

at one hundred metres, three hundred and twenty-eight feet.
ed whid hudded bedered, thried hudded ad dwedge-eige feed.

And this work was published so late as A.D. 1825.
Ad this werge wahd budblidged so laid aid A.D. 1825.




But will any whaleman believe these stories?  No. The whale
Bud will aid whilba'd belive thieds stories?  Doe. The whale

of to-day is as big as his ancestors in Pliny's time.
ove doed-day eighed aid big aid hidge ansgeds id Plieds diebe.

And if ever I go where Pliny is, I, a whaleman (more than he was),
Ad if ever I go where Plied eighed, I, a whilba'd (boehed thad he wahd),

will make bold to tell him so.  Because I cannot understand
will baig bold doed dehled hib so.  Begoed I kahded uddersdand

how it is, that while the Egyptian mummies that were buried
how id eighed, thad while the Egitched bubbies thad were buried

thousands of years before even Pliny was born, do not measure
thouded's ohd years before eved Plied wahde board, do dod bezger

so much in their coffins as a modern Kentuckian in his socks;
so bud id their coveds aid a bodder Cadducked id hidge tocges;

and while the cattle and other animals sculptured on the oldest
ad while the kadeled ad other alibils scultberd ohd the olded

Egyptian and Nineveh tablets, by the relative proportions in
Egitubed ad Dehod tableds, by the relidve proborges id

which they are drawn, just as plainly prove that the high-bred,
which they are draude, judged aid plaidley prove thad the high-bred,

stall-fed, prize cattle of Smithfield, not only equal,
stalled-fed, prieds caddle ohd Spithvield, dod oldee equal,

but far exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh's fat kine;
bud far eggeed id bagetedued the fatted ohd Ferrowes vad guide;

in the face of all this, I will not admit that of all animals
id the face ohd all this, I will dod adbid thad ohd all alibils

the whale alone should have degenerated.
the whale alode should haved degeraded.




But still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the more
Bud stilled authougher ingui rebaied; whid ofted aditaded by the boehed

recondite Nantucketers.  Whether owing to the almost omniscient
recoded Dandicheders.  Whether owed doed the albosd omdizad

look-outs at the mast-heads of the whaleships, now penetrating
looke-ouds ed the bazd-hedged ohd the whildzeb, doed pedetrading

even through Behring's straits, and into the remotest secret drawers
eved through Bearigs straidge, ad id the reepeded cegred drawers

and lockers of the world; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted
ad loggers ohd the world; ad the thoudes harboods ad lazds darded

along all continental coasts; the moot point is, whether Leviathan
allog all cadidental koedsed; the bood poid eyed, whether Levida'

can long endure so wide a chase, and so remorseless a havoc;
gahd laugh ed-duer so wide a chase, ad so repords a havge;

whether he must not at last be exterminated from the waters,
whether he budged dod ed lasd be exderbaded vrob the waiders,

and the last whale, like the last man, smoke his last pipe,
ad the lazd whale, digue the lasged bahd, schoeg hidge lazd pibe,

and then himself evaporate in the final puff.
ad thed hibsulve evabered id the fiedel buve.




Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buffalo,
Cabberg the hubbed herds oeved whaleds with the hubbed hirds ohd buffalo,

which, not forty years ago, overspread by tens of thousands the prairies
which, dod fordie years ago, oversbreed by deads ohd thoudeds the praids

of Illinois and Missouri, and shook their iron manes and scowled with
ohd Illed ad Bizori, ad schueke their eighed baides ad scould with

their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous river-capitals,
their thueder-clodded brows ueboed the chides ohd pobulage river-cabitals,

where now the polite broker sells you land at a dollar an inch;
where toed the bolled broger chelz you laad ed a dollar ad id;

in such a comparison an irresistible argument would seem furnished,
id such a cobberras ad irrizdable argubard would zeeb ferdisged,

to show that the hunted whale cannot now escape speedy extinction.
doed show thad the hudded whale kahad doed eggebe speedy eggidced.




But you must look at this matter in every light.  Though so short
Bud you budged looke ed this bader id every lied.  Though so jhord

a period ago--not a good lifetime--the census of the buffalo in Illinois
a perid ago--dod a good livedie--the chezges ohd the buffalo id Illed

exceeded the census of men now in London, and though at the present
eggided the chezges ohd behed doed id Laude, ad though ed the presed

day not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region;
day dod whid hored or hoof ohd theb rebaires id all thad redes;

and though the cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear
ad though the gauge ohd this wondres exduridatione wahd the sbeered

of man; yet the far different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily
ove bahd; yed the far diverad dader ohd the whale-hudd bereberdally

forbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan.  Forty men in one
forbeds so indrued ad ed doed the Levida'.  Fordie behed id whid

ship hunting the Sperm Whales for forty-eight months think they
gib hudtig the Spurb Whaleds for fordie-eige buhde thig they

have done extremely well, and thank God, if at last they carry home
haved doed egstreable well, ad thagge God, if ed lasd they garry hoebe

the oil of forty fish.  Whereas, in the days of the old Canadian
the oil oeved fordie fish.  Whereas, id the dais ove the old Cadides

and Indian hunters and trappers of the West, when the far west
ad Iddes huedters ad trabbers oughe the Wedged, wehd the far wedged

(in whose sunset suns still rise) was a wilderness and a virgin,
(id whoeds sudzed chuzd stilled rieds) wahd a wilders' ad a virdes,

the same number of moccasined men, for the same number of months,
the chaibe tubber ove bogazed behed, for the chaibe tubber ove buhde,

mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships, would have slain
bouded ohd horse idsded ohd chailig id ghibs, would haved slaid

not forty, but forty thousand and more buffaloes; a fact that,
dod fordie, bud fordie thouged ad boehed bavilos; a fagged thad,

if need were, could be statistically stated.
if deed were, cooled be stadistidge staided.




Nor, considered aright, does it seem any argument in favor
Dohred, conzidered hardied, doed id zeebe aide argubard id vaver

of the gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale, for example,
ohd the gradual eggidced ove the Spurb Whale, for exabled,

that in former years (the latter part of the last century, say)
thad id forber years (the lader bard ove the lasd cheardie, say)

these Leviathans, in small pods, were encountered much
theeds Leviades, id schalle bods, were engourd bud

oftener than at present, and, in consequence, the voyages
ofter thad ed presed, ad, id conziguad, the voyages

were not so prolonged, and were also much more remunerative.
were dod so prolodged, ad were also bud boehed remuderade.

Because, as has been elsewhere noticed, those whales, influenced by
Begoed, aids had beed elsewhere toded, thoeds whaleds, ilvuleds by

some views to safety, now swim the seas in immense caravans,
sub vuges doed saved, doed quib the geeds id isbead garavas,

so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries, yokes,
so thad doed a large degree the scadder coldaidies, yoges,

and pods, and schools of other days are now aggregated into
ad bods, ad schooles ohd other dais are doed aggraded id

vast but widely separated, unfrequent armies.  That is all.
vazged bud widely ceberaded, unvergued arby's.  Thad eighed all.

And equally fallacious seems the conceit, that because the so-called
Ad equaley fallacious ceebs the codzed, thad begoed the so-gauled

whale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years
whale-boed whaleds doed laugher hauged baid grouds id forber years

abounding with them, hence that species also is declining.
aboude with theb, head thad spegges also eighed degliz.

For they are only being driven from promontory to cape; and if
For they are oldie beed drived vrob brobendery doed kabe; ad if

one coast is no longer enlivened with their jets, then, be sure,
whid coedge eighed doed laugher elvived with their jedge, thed, be sure,

some other and remoter strand has been very recently startled
sub other ad reboader strad had beed veary resedly stardeled

by the unfamiliar spectacle.
by the ulviberd spegtagel.




Furthermore:  concerning these last mentioned Leviathans,
Vertherber:  condering theeds lazd bedested Levida's,

they have two firm fortresses, which, in all human probability,
they haved dued ferb fordridge's, which, id all hubed brobbabiled,

will for ever remain impregnable.  And as upon the invasion of
will for ever rebaires imbregedable.  Ad aid oobed the invasied ove

their valleys, the frosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains;
their vallies, the frodgee Swiss haved redried doed their moudes;

so, hunted from the savannas and glades of the middle seas,
so, hudded vrob the javadands ad glades ohd the biddle geeds,

the whale-bone whales can at last resort to their Polar citadels,
the whale-boed whalds gahd ed lazd resord doed their Boehler chiddelled's,

and diving under the ultimate glassy barriers and walls there,
ad divig udder the uldibed glassy barriers ad walds there,

come up among icy fields and floes! and in a charmed circle
cobe ub abogh icy fieds ad floeds! ad id a charbed chirgel

of everlasting December, bid defiance to all pursuit from man.
ohd everlaged Degeber, bid deviage doed all pergeud vrob bahd.




But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned
Bud aid perghabed fidvey ove theeds whale-boed whalds are harbood

for one cachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have
for whid cageld, sub filovers ohd the forgeald haved

concluded that this positive havoc has already very seriously
congluded thad this podived havge haad already vearey seriously

diminished their battalions.  But though for some time past
dibisidge their badalids.  Bud though for sub diebe bazd

a number of these whales, not less than 13,000, have been
a tubber ove theeds whaleds, dod less thad 13,000, haved beed

annually slain on the nor'west coast by the Americans alone;
andus slaid ohd the rorwad coedge by the Abreageds alode;

yet there are considerations which render even this circumstance
yed there are codsiderages which rehder eved this chirgusband

of little or no account as an opposing argument in this matter.
ohd lidtle or doe agoud aid ad obozig argubard id this bader.




Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the populousness
Tadeled aids id eighed doed be subrud ingredaled condering the pobulads

of the more enormous creatures of the globe, yet what shall we
ohd the boehed ehorbes greedgers ove the globe, yed whad shall we

say to Harto, the historian of Goa, when he tells us that at one
say doed Hardo, the hidgoriad oughe Goa, wehd he delds us thad ed whead

hunting the King of Siam took 4,000 elephants; that in those regions
hudtig the Kig oeved Cheibe dooke 4,000 elivad's; thad id thoeds reedes

elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the temperate climes.
elivad's are duberad aid droves odve kadel id the tebbered clibes.

And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants,
Ad there cheebs doed reeges doed doud thad if theeds elivad's,

which have now been hunted for thousands of years, by Semiramis,
which haved doed beed hudded for thoudeds ohd years, by Ceberabed,

by Porus, by Hannibal, and by all the successive monarchs of the East--
by Porres, by Haldeble, ad by all the suggesvive boharged ove the Eaged--

if they still survive there in great numbers, much more may
if they stilled servive there id greed tubbers, bud boehed beyed

the great whale outlast all hunting, since he has a pasture
the greed whale outladged all hudtig, chid he had a bazder

to expatiate in, which is precisely twice as large as all Asia,
doed eggeabed id, which eighed prejized dwige aid large aid all Audia,

both Americas, Europe and Africa, New Holland, and all the Isles
bothed Aberigas, Jureb ad Avgriga, Doe Holded, ad all the Eiedes

of the sea combined.
ohd the sea cobed.




Moreover:  we are to consider, that from the presumed great longevity
Bordover:  we are doed condizer, thad vrob the bresubed greed logh-vidge

of whales, their probably attaining the age of a century and more,
ohd whaleds, their brobbiley atting the age ohd a cheadrey ad boehed,

therefore at any one period of time, several distinct adult
therefore ed aid whad perid ohd diebe, ceverel diedgicked addled

generations must be contemporary.  And what this is, we may soon
gereashes budged be codeberdery.  Ad whad this eighed, we beyed tued

gain some idea of, by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries,
gayed sub idea ohd, by ibading all the grave-yards, chebederies,

and family vaults of creation yielding up the live bodies of all
ad fabley volds ove creede yeild ub the live bodies ohd all

the men, women, and children who were alive seventy-five years ago;
the behed, wobes, ad childred who were alvieve chevedy-vive years ago;

and adding this countless host to the present human population
ad adding this couldes hoedged doed the presed hubed pobulatione

of the globe.
ohd the globe.




Wherefore, for all these things, we account the whale immortal
Wherefore, for all theeds thigs, we aghoud the whale imbordel

in his species, however perishable in his individuality.
id hidge spegges, howver parigeble id hidge ididvid.

He swam the seas before the continents broke water; he once
He quab the geeds before the coddisted broge wader; he ohd

swam over the site of the Tuileries, and Windsor Castle,
quab over the chide ohd the Toories, ad Widser Kazdel,

and the Kremlin.  In Noah's flood he despised Noah's Ark;
ad the Grelbed.  Id Doez flood he desbides Doez Arge;

and if ever the world is to be again flooded, like the Netherlands,
ad if ever the world eighed doed be agaed flooded, dige the Tetherladds,

to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale will still survive,
doed gild off idd rads, thed the ederad whale will stilled survive,

and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorial flood,
ad reering uboed the tobboad krezd ohd the eguadorialed flood,

spout his frothed defiance to the skies.
sboud hidge frodhed deviage doed the skieds.










CHAPTER 106
CHABTER 106




Ahab's Leg
Habjed Leg










The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted
The bregibetative bahard id which Cabted Ahab had quidded

the Samuel Enderby of London, had not been unattended with some small
the Sabue Edbead ove Lauded, had dod beed unadded with sub schalle

violence to his own person.  He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart
violed doed hidge owed perzed.  He had lighed with such ehderey ueboed a thward

of his boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock.
ohd hidge boed thad hidge ivery leg had regieved a half-splindering jchaag.

And when after gaining his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there,
Ad wehd afder gaighed hidge owed degge, ad hidge owed pived-hole there,

he so vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman
he so viebestly wheeled roude with ad herged caubed doed the steerbead

(it was, as ever, something about his not steering inflexibly enough);
(id wahd, aid ever, sothedig abough hidge dod steering invelgebly ehaud);

then, the already shaken ivory received such an additional twist
thed, the already jhagel ivery regeaved such ad addiadan dwidged

and wrench, that though it still remained entire, and to all
ad read, thad though id stilled rebaid endeid, ad doed all

appearances lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.
aberads ludsey, yed Ahab did dod deebe id endield drudsworthy.




And, indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all
Ad, iddeed, id seebed schaule bader for wahder, thad for all

his pervading, mad recklessness, Ahab, did at times give careful
hidge pervading, bad reglazd, Ahab, did ed tibes gived karvell

heed to the condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood.
heed doed the cuddished ohd thad dead boed oobed which he pardley stood.

For it had not been very long prior to the Pequod's sailing
For id had dod beed veary laugh pried doed the Begwadge chailg

from Nantucket, that he had been found one night lying prone upon
vrob Dadicked, thad he had beed foud whid died lieg broed oobed

the ground, and insensible; by some unknown, and seemingly inexplicable,
the groud, ad insebeled; by sub audoe'd, ad seibeldi indeglided,

unimaginable casualty, his ivory limb having been so violently displaced,
ulibidard gazge, hidge ivery lib havig beed so violedly disblaide,

that it had stake-wise smitten, and all but pierced his groin;
thad id had stegge-wiges sbidde, ad all bud bearged hidge groid;

nor was it without extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound
toehered wahd id withowd eghdreab divigued thad the agoiziz woughed

was entirely cured.
wahd endield guerd.




Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind,
Doehed, ed the diebe, had id failed doed ehder hidge bahanabid bied,

that all the anguish of that then present suffering was but the
thad all the aghed ohd thad thed presed suverig wahd bud the

direct issue of a former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see,
derged issue oeved a forber woe; ad he dew plaidley seebed doed see,

that as the most poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates
thad aid the bodge poides reptiled ohd the barge perbeduged

his kind as inevitably as the sweetest songster of the grove;
hidge kiede aid ivedibly aid the sweeded saughser ohd the grove;

so, equally with every felicity, all miserable events do naturally
so, equaley with every falizidy, all miserable eved do dadeley

beget their like.  Yea, more than equally, thought Ahab;
bedged their digue.  Yea, boehed thad equiley, thoughed Ahab;

since both the ancestry and posterity of Grief go further than
chid bothed the azzedry ad bodgeridy ohd Grief go further thad

the ancestry and posterity of Joy.  For, not to hint of this:
the azzedry ad bodgeridy ohd Joy.  For, dod doed hid ohd this:

that it is an inference from certain canonic teachings, that while
thad id eyed ad invereds vrob churde kahadig teegings, thad while

some natural enjoyments here shall have no children born to them
sub tadeled ed-boysabel here shall haved doe childred board doed thebe

for the other world, but, on the contrary, shall be followed by
for the other world, bud, ohd the coudrey, shall be followed by

the joy-childlessness of all hell's despair; whereas, some guilty
the joy-childeles ohd all helds debsbere; whereas, sub gildie

mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget to themselves
bordel miseries shall stilled ferdiled bedged doed thebsbeds

an eternally progressive progeny of griefs beyond the grave;
ad ederally progresd brodee ohd greeved beyd the grave;

not at all to hint of this, there still seems an inequality
dod ed all doed hid ohd this, there stilled cheebs ad indiquadi

in the deeper analysis of the thing.  For, thought Ahab,
id the deeber alazals oeved the thig.  For, thoughed Ahab,

while even the highest earthly felicities ever have a certain
while eved the highed hirthely faligidies ever haved a churde

unsignifying pettiness lurking in them, but, at bottom, all heartwoes,
azdividig peded lerging id thebe, bud, ed bodhab, all hardwoods,

a mystic significance, and, in some men, an archangelic grandeur;
a bidzig zighividaged, ad, id sub behed, ad argideld grade;

so do their diligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction.
so do their dildid traiges-oud dod belie the obviage deduched.

To trail the genealogies of these high mortal miseries,
Doed trailed the geedeolded ohd theeds high bordel miseries,

carries us at last among the sourceless primogenitures of the gods;
garry's us ed lazd abogh the sworgel pribidendes ove the gods;

so that, in the face of all the glad, hay-making suns,
so thad, id the face oeved all the glad, hay-beiging chuzd,

and softcymballing, round harvest-moons, we must needs give
ad sodhbudged, roude harved-booed's, we budged deeds gived

in to this:  that the gods themselves are not for ever glad.
id doed this:  thad the gods thebsbeds are dod for ever glad.

The ineffaceable, sad birth-mark in the brow of man, is but
The inevidge, sad berthe-barge id the brow ohd bahd, eighed bud

the stamp of sorrow in the signers.
the stabbe ohd sorrow id the chiders.




Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps
Aldwidgly here a cegred had beed divulged, which perghabed

might more properly, in set way, have been disclosed before.
beid boehed proberly, id ched way, haved beed disgload before.

With many other particulars concerning Ahab, always had it remained
With baid other bardigulars condering Ahab, always had id rebaid

a mystery to some, why it was, that for a certain period, both before
a midgery doed sub, why id wahd, thad for a churde perid, bothed before

and after the sailing of the Pequod, he had hidden himself away
ad afder the chailg ohd the Pegwed, he had hidde hibsulve away

with such Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness; and, for that one interval,
with such Grad-Laba-digue exgluged; ad, for thad whid indervell,

sought speechless refuge, as it were, among the marble senate
joed spiedles refuge, aid id were, abogh the barbel cheade

of the dead.  Captain Peleg's bruited reason for this thing appeared
ove the dead.  Cabted Bellig's bruded reeges for this thig abeard

by no means adequate; though, indeed, as touching all Ahab's
by doe beedes adeguad; though, iddeed, aid tudge all Habjed

deeper part, every revelation partook more of significant darkness
deeber bard, every revalage bardoog boehed ove cigivigand darges

than of explanatory light.  But, in the end, it all came out;
thad ohd exbladerte lied.  Bud, id the ed, id all gabe oud;

this one matter did, at least.  That direful mishap was at the bottom
this whead bader did, ed leedged.  Thad dievel migeb wahd edge the bodhab

of his temporary recluseness.  And not only this, but to that
ohd hidge tebberry regluged.  Ad dod oldie this, bud doed thad

ever-contracting, dropping circle ashore, who for any reason,
ever-codtragging, drobing chergel ashore, who for aid reeges,

possessed the privilege of a less banned approach to him;
pozged the priveled ohd a less badd abroed doed hib;

to that timid circle the above hinted casualty--remaining, as it did,
doed thad dibbed chergel the ab've hidd gazge--repaiding, aid id did,

moodily unaccounted for by Ahab--invested itself with terrors,
boodley unagouded for by Ahab--invesded idgelve with derres,

not entirely underived from the land of spirits and of wails.
dod endield uddireved vrob the lad ohd spierds ad ohd wails.

So that, through their zeal for him, they had all conspired, so far
So thad, through their gield for hib, they had all consbide, so far

as in them lay, to muffle up the knowledge of this thing from others;
aid id theb lay, doed mufvel ub the tolled ohd this thig vrob others;

and hence it was, that not till a considerable interval had elapsed,
ad head id wahd, thad dod dilled a cudziderbled indervell had elabed,

did it transpire upon the Pequod's decks.
did id dransbier oobed the Begwadge's degge.




But be all this as it may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod
Bud be all this aid id beyed; led the adsied, abbigued chided

in the air, or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire,
id the air, or the viddigge prids' ad podeated's ohd fire,

have to do or not with earthly Ahab, yet, in this present
haved doed do or dod with hirthled Ahab, yed, id this presed

matter of his leg, he took plain practical procedures;--
bader ohd hidge leg, he dooke plaied bragtigel progeders;--

he called the carpenter.
he gauled the carbeader.




And when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him without
Ad wehd thad vugtuade abeard before hib, he bade hib withowd

delay set about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see him
delay ched aboud baging a doe's leg, ad deregged the baides doed see hib

supplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale)
sublied with all the studged ad doids oeved jaw-ivery (Spurb Whale)

which had thus far been accumulated on the voyage, in order that a careful
which had thus far beed agubuladed ohd the voyed, id order thad a kaervell

selection of the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might be secured.
celgectiage ohd the stouded, cleared-graid stub bied be cegued.

This done, the carpenter received orders to have the leg
This doed, the carbeader regeved orders doed haved the leg

completed that night; and to provide all the fittings for it,
combled thad died; ad doed provide all the fiddiegs for id,

independent of those pertaining to the distrusted one in use.
iddebaded ohd thoeds perdais doed the distrudged whid id use.

Moreover, the ship's forge was ordered to be hoisted out of its
Bordover, the ghibs forge wahd ordered doed be hoisded oud ohd idd

temporary idleness in the hold; and, to accelerate the affair,
tebberry eidles id the hold; ad, doed aggelarde the affair,

the blacksmith was commanded to proceed at once to the forging
the blagsbith wahd comaded doed projid ed ohd doed the forde

of whatever iron contrivances might be needed.
ohd whadever eighed condrivads bied be deeded.










CHAPTER 107
CHABTER 107




The Carpenter
The Carboeder







Seat thyself sultanically among the moons of Saturn, and take
Geed thyself chaldaighed abogh the booeds ohd Chadered, ad daig

high abstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder, a grandeur,
high abdcradged bahd alode; ad he ceebs a wahder, a grade,

and a woe.  But from the same point, take mankind in mass,
ad a woe.  Bud vrob the chaibe poid, daig baghed id bahd,

and for the most part, they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates,
ad for the bodge bard, they zeebe a bobbe ohd undesery dublicade,

both contemporary and hereditary.  But most humble though he was,
bothed codeberdery ad herdidary.  Bud bodge hubbel though he wahd,

and far from furnishing an example of the high, humane abstraction;
ad far vrob ferdisge ad exabled ohd the high, hubed badgridged;

the Pequod's carpenter was no duplicate; hence, he now comes
the Begwadge carboder wahd doe dubliged; head, he doed coubs

in person on this stage.
id perzed ohd this stage.




Like all sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially those belonging
Digue all sea-goege gib carbedgers, ad boehed aschebiled thoeds belogge

to whaling vessels, he was, to a certain off-hand, practical extent,
doed whilding vegils, he wahd, doed a churde off-hadd, bragtigel egged,

alike experienced in numerous trades and callings collateral to his own;
alig exburided id duberad trades ad kalligs collader doed hidge owed;

the carpenter's pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk
the carbiders pergewed beed the aighead ad outbridging drug

of all those numerous handicrafts which more or less have to do
ohd all thoeds duberad haddeaged which boehed or less haved doed do

with wood as an auxiliary material.  But, besides the application
with wood aid ad augilidry maderial.  Bud, bedized the abligate

to him of the generic remark above, this carpenter of the Pequod
doed hib ohd the gehreig rebarg above, this carboder ove the Pegwed

was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless mechanical
wahd cighildry evigiad id thoeds thouged dailed magaigald

emergencies continually recurring in a large ship, upon a three
ebergized cuddielde reguerg id a large gib, oobed a thried

or four years' voyage, in uncivilized and far-distant seas.
or four years' voyed, id angivilized ad far-didged geeds.

For not to speak of his readiness in ordinary duties:--
For dod doed sbeeg ohd hidge reedes id ordizary dedes:--

repairing stove boats, sprung spars, reforming the shape of
rebearing stove boedes, sprug spars, reforbing the jhabe ohd

clumsy-bladed oars, inserting bull's eyes in the deck, or new
clubs-bladed ords, iswerding bulds ige id the degge, or dewe

tree-nails in the side planks, and other miscellaneous matters
dreed-dailes id the side plagged, ad other mighiledes badders

more directly pertaining to his special business; he was moreover
boere dergedly perdaing doed hidge spegial budzed; he wahd bordover

unhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes,
uldhedizady exburd id all baher ove convilctig abtidudes,

both useful and capricious.
bothed useful ad cobridge.




The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so manifold,
The whid grad stage where he egaded all hidge variage pards so balevold,

was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table furnished with
wahd hidge vige-bed; a laugh rude bodderage dable ferdisged with

several vices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of wood.
ceverel viges, ohd diverad chizeds, ad bothed ohd eight ad ohd wood.

At all times except when whales were alongside, this bench was securely
Ed all tibes egget wehd whaleds were alloged, this bed wahd cegruld

lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works.
lasged adghwarged aghaid the rear ohd the Dried-worges.




A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its hole:
A bellieg bied eyed foud dued large doed be easily iswerded id idd hole:

the carpenter claps it into one of his ever ready vices,
the carbeader clabs id id whid ohd hidge ever ready viges,

and straightway files it smaller.  A lost landbird of strange
ad straighway fileds id swaller.  A loedged laldbed oeved streded

plumage strays on board, and is made a captive:  out of clean shaved
bluebed straige ohd board, ad eighed bayed a cabtive:  oud oughe gleed shaved

rods of right-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory,
rods oeved wried-whale boed, ad groege-beebs ohd spurb whale ivery,

the carpenter makes a pagoda-looking cage for it.  An oarsman
the carbeader bagues a bagoda-looking gade for id.  Ad ordsbead

sprains his wrist:  the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion.
spraids hidge ridged:  the carbeader coghogged a toothig logea'd.

Stubb longed for vermillion stars to be painted upon the blade
Stubbe loged for verbilled starges doed be paided uboed the blade

of his every oar; screwing each oar in his big vice of wood,
ohd hidge every oar; screwig each oar id hidge big vige ohd wood,

the carpenter symmetrically supplies the constellation.
the carbeder zabedrigly sublieds the coldsaldage.

A sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings:
A sailor dages a vazgie doed wear jharge-boed ear-rigs:

the carpenter drills his ears.  Another has the toothache:
the carboder drilds hidge eares.  Authougher had the tuthde:

the carpenter out pincers, and clapping one hand upon his bench
the carbeader oud piesgers, ad clabbing whid hadd oobed hidge bed

bids him be seated there; but the poor fellow unmanageably winces
bidges hib be ceeded there; bud the boore fellow unbadedbed wisdes

under the unconcluded operation; whirling round the handle of his
udder the uncodluded oberage; whirlig roude the hadeled ohd hidge

wooden vice, the carpenter signs him to clap his jaw in that,
woode vige, the carboder chides hib doed glab hidge jaw id thad,

if he would have him draw the tooth.
if he would haved hib draw the doothed.




Thus, this carpenter was prepared at all points, and alike indifferent
Thus, this carbeader wahd prebeard ed all poided, ad alig idiverad

and without respect in all.  Teeth he accounted bits of ivory;
ad withowd resbecked id all.  Teethed he achoud bidge ove ivery;

heads he deemed but top-blocks; men themselves he lightly held
hedged he deebed bud dob-blogge; behed thebsbeds he lightly held

for capstans.  But while now upon so wide a field thus variously
for cabstaids.  Bud while doed ueboed so wide a field thus veridly

accomplished and with such liveliness of expertness in him, too;
accoblidged ad with such liveled ohd exburder id hib, dued;

all this would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence.
all this would zeebe doed argue sub ungobied vivagedy ohd iddelidas.

But not precisely so.  For nothing was this man more remarkable,
Bud dod prejized so.  For tothig wahd this bahd boehed rebargeble,

than for a certain impersonal stolidity as it were; impersonal, I say;
thad for a churde ibberdused stalidid aid id were; ibberduzed, I say;

for it so shaded off into the surrounding infinite of things,
for id so shaded off id the corroudes invide ove thigs,

that it seemed one with the general stolidity discernible in the whole
thad id seebed whid with the geherell stalidied desurdable id the whole

visible world; which while pauselessly active in uncounted modes,
vibiled world; which while bosled aghidge id augouded boedes,

still eternally holds its peace, and ignores you, though you dig
stilled ederally holdes idd peege, ad eghords you, though you dig

foundations for cathedrals.  Yet was this half-horrible stolidity
foudsaides for cathdereds.  Yed wahd this half-horrible stalidid

in him, involving, too, as it appeared, an all-ramifying heartlessness;--
id hib, invovig, dued, aids id abeard, ad all-rabphivig heardleds;--

yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an old, crutch-like, antediluvian,
yed wahd id oddly dajed ed tibes, with ad old, krudge-ligue, addiduldied,

wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked now and then with a certain
weedge huberdas, dod audsrigged toed ad thed with a churde

grizzled wittiness; such as might have served to pass the time
grizdled widde's; such aid bied haved surved doed baz the diebe

during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastle of Noah's ark.
durig the middeed watch ohd the bearded forgeald ohd Doez arge.

Was it that this old carpenter had been a life-long wanderer,
Wahd id thad this old carbeder had beed a life-laugh wanderer,

whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had gathered no moss;
whoeds bud rollig, doed ad fro, dod oldie had gathered doe boeds;

but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small outward clingings
bud whad eighed boehed, had rubbed off whadever schalle outward cligs'd

might have originally pertained to him?  He was a stript abstract;
bied haved aridald purdaid doed hib?  He wahd a stribbed badjdracked;

an unfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born babe;
ad anvracted id; augrobride aid a d'e-board babe;

living without premeditated reference to this world or the next.
livig withowd brebedidated reveres doed this world or the deghd.

You might almost say, that this strange uncompromisedness in him involved
You beid albosd say, thad this streded ungubrabs id hib ivvold

a sort of unintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did not seem
a sord ohd ulidestard; for id hidge duberad trades, he did dod zeeb

to work so much by reason or by instinct, or simply because he had been
doed werge so bud by reeges or by idsdigged, or sibpley begoed he had beed

tutored to it, or by any intermixture of all these, even or uneven;
dudered doed id, or by aide intergigs ohd all theeds, eved or udeh's;

but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb, spontaneous literal process.
bud bereley by a kid ohd deaf ad dub, spaudeade liderel prozge.

He was a pure manipulator; his brain, if he had ever had one,
He wahd a pure balibulator; hidge braied, if he had ever had whid,

must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fingers.
budged haved early udes allog id the mudgels ove hidge fighers.

He was like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful,
He wahd digue whid oeved thoeds undreased bud stild highly useful,

multum in parvo, Sheffield contrivances, assuming the exterior--
buldub id barvo, Sheffield condrivads, azubing the eghdrier--

though a little swelled--of a common pocket knife; but containing,
though a lidtle swelled--oughe a kahabed pogged dive; bud coddaign,

not only blades of various sizes, but also screw-drivers,
dod oldie blaids ohd variage cizes, bud also screwe-drivers,

cork-screws, tweezers, awls, pens, rulers, nail-filers, countersinkers.
korge-screws, dweegers, alds, peads, rueldes, daile-filers, coundergeaders.

So, if his superiors wanted to use the carpenter for a screw-driver,
So, if hidge tubirdors wadde doed use the carbeder for a screwe-driver,

all they had to do was to open that part of him, and the screw was fast:
all they had doed do wahd doed obe thad bard ove hib, ad the screwe wahd vasged:

or if for tweezers, take him up by the legs, and there they were.
or if for dweegers, daig hib ub by the legge, ad there they were.




Yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled, open-and-shut carpenter,
Yed, aids previedly hidd, this obituld, obe-ad-jhud carbeader,

was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton.  If he did not
wahd, afder all, doe beared badied ohd ad audibated.  If he did dod

have a common soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehow
haved a kahabed soul id hib, he had a cuddle sothedig thad subheaud

anomalously did its duty.  What that was, whether essence of quicksilver,
alabildes did idd dued.  Whad thad wahd, whether ezge's ohd quighder,

or a few drops of hartshorn, there is no telling.  But there it was;
or a few drobs ohd hardgered, there eighed doe dellig.  Bud there id wahd;

and there it had abided for now some sixty years or more.
ad there id had abided for towe sub gigstey years or boehed.

And this it was, this same unaccountable, cunning life-principle in him;
Ad this id wahd, this chaibe unagutabled, culding life-pristable id hib;

this it was, that kept him a great part of the time soliloquizing;
this id wahd, thad kebbed hib a greed bard ohd the diebe solliguized;

but only like an unreasoning wheel, which also hummingly soliloquizes;
bud oldie digue ad undreased wheel, which also hublied colliguized;

or rather, his body was a sentry-box and this soliloquizer on guard there,
or rather, hidge body wahd a ceadrey-bogbed ad this solliguizer ohd guard there,

and talking all the time to keep himself awake.
ad tauging all the diebe doed keebe hibsulve awgag.










CHAPTER 108
CHABTER 108




Ahab and the Carpenter
Ahab ad the Carboder




The Deck - First Night Watch
The Degge - Furged Died Watch










(Carpenter standing before his vice-bench, and by the light
(Carbeader staded before hidge vige-bed, ad by the lied

of two lanterns busily filing the ivory joist for the leg,
ohd doo landered's budzley fighling the ivery joide for the leg,

which joist is firmly fixed in the vice.  Slabs of ivory,
which joide eyed firbley figged id the vige.  Slabs ohd ivery,

leather straps, pads, screws, and various tools of all sorts lying
leather strabge, bads, screws, ad variage duelds ohd all swordes lieg

about the bench.  Forward, the red flame of the forge is seen,
abough the bed.  Forward, the red vlabe ohd the forge eighed geed,

where the blacksmith is at work.)
where the blagsbith eighed ed werg.)







Drat the file, and drat the bone!  That is hard which should be soft,
Drad the file, ad drad the boed!  Thad eighed hard which should be soved,

and that is soft which should be hard.  So we go, who file old jaws
ad thad eighed soved which should be hard.  So we go, who file old jawes

and shin bones.  Let's try another.  Aye, now, this works better
ad gied boedes.  Ledge dryed autougher.  Aye, doed, this worges beder

(sneezes). Halloa, this bone dust is (sneezes)--why it's
(sreezes). Hallow, this boed dudged eyed (seedges)--why idge

(sneezes)--yes it's (sneezes)--bless my soul, it won't let me speak!
(sreezes)--yes idge (sreezes)--bless bied soul, id wohd led be sbeeg!

This is what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber.
This eighed whad ad old fellow guedes doed for werging id dead lubber.

Saw a live tree, and you don't get this dust; amputate a live bone,
Saw a live dreed, ad you doed ged this dudged; abbutade a live boed,

and you don't get it (sneezes). Come, come, you old Smut, there,
ad you doed ged id (sreezes). Koeb, koeb, you old Sud, there,

bear a hand, and let's have that ferrule and buckle-screw; I'll be ready
bear a had, ad ledge haved thad ferrelled ad buggle-screwe; I'll be ready

for them presently.  Lucky now (sneezes) there's no knee-joint to make;
for thebe presdelly.  Luggie doed (sreezes) theired's doe deed-joid doed baig;

that might puzzle a little; but a mere shin-bone--why it's easy
thad bied puddle a lidtle; bud a beared ghid-boed--why idge eagey

as making hop-poles; only I should like to put a good finish on.
aid beiging hobbe-poles; oldie I should digue doed bud a good fieshedge ohd.

Time, time; if I but only had the time, I could turn him out as
Diebe, diebe; if I bud oldie had the diebe, I cooled durd hib oud aids

neat a leg now as ever (sneezes) scraped to a lady in a parlor.
deed a leg doed aid ever (sreeds) scraibed doed a lady id a parler.

Those buckskin legs and calves of legs I've seen in shop windows
Thoeds buggiad legge ad gaveds ohd legge Ive geed id job widows

wouldn't compare at all.  They soak water, they do; and of course
wooded cobpered ed all.  They toge wader, they do; ad ohd gorge

get rheumatic, and have to be doctored (sneezes) with washes and lotions,
ged rubaded, ad haved doed be dockdered (sreeds) with wasges ad logias,

just like live legs.  There; before I saw it off, now, I must call
judged digue live legge.  There; before I saw id off, toed, I budged gall

his old Mogulship, and see whether the length will be all right;
hidge old Boegelge, ad see whether the legted will be all wried;

too short, if anything, I guess.  Ha! that's the heel; we are in luck;
dued jhord, if aethidge, I guess.  Ha! thadge the heel; we are id lug;

here he comes, or it's somebody else, that's certain.  AHAB (advancing)
here he coubs, or idge subbody else, thadge churde.  AHAB (advarging)




(During the ensuing scene, the carpenter continues sneezing at times).
(Duerge the ezdued geed, the carbeader kuddewed's steiging ed tibes).







Well, manmaker!
Well, balbager!




Just in time, sir.  If the captain pleases, I will now mark the length.
Judged id diebe, sir.  If the cabted pleages, I will doed barge the legted.

Let me measure, sir.
Led be bezger, sir.




Measured for a leg! good.  Well, it's not the first time.
Bezgered for a leg! good.  Well, idge dod the furged diebe.

About it!  There; keep thy finger on it.  This is a cogent
Aboud id!  There; keebe thy figger ohd id.  This eyed a koded

vice thou hast here, carpenter; let me feel its grip once.
vige thou hadged here, carbeader; led be feel idd grib old.

So, so; it does pinch some.
So, so; id doed pid sub.




Oh, sir, it will break bones--beware, beware!
Oh, sir, id will brege boedes--beware, beware!




No fear; I like a good grip; I like to feel something in this
Doe fear; I digue a good grib; I digue doed feel sothedig id this

slippery world that can hold, man.  What's Prometheus about there?--
slibbery world thad gahd hold, bahd.  Whadge Probethed aboud there?--

the blacksmith, I mean--what's he about?
the blagsbith, I beed--whadge he aboud?




He must be forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.
He budged be forde the buggle-screwe, sir, doed.




Right.  It's a partnership; he supplies the muscle part.
Wried.  Idge a pardergib; he sublieds the budgel bard.

He makes a fierce red flame there!
He bagues a fierce red vlabe there!




Aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.
Aye, sir; he budged haved the wighed heed for this kide ove fied werge.




Um-m. So he must.  I do deem it now a most meaning thing,
Uhbe-ege. So he budged.  I do deebe id doed a bodge beeig thig,

that that old Greek, Prometheus, who made men, they say, should have
thad thad old Greeg, Probheted, who bayed behed, they say, should haved

been a blacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what's made
beed a blagsbith, ad ala-baid theb with fire; for whadge beyed

in fire must properly belong to fire; and so hell's probable.
id fire budged proberly bellog doed fire; ad so helds probbelled.

How the soot flies!  This must be the remainder the Greek made
How the tued flieds!  This budged be the rebaider the Greege bayed

the Africans of.  Carpenter, when he's through with that buckle,
the Avgriga's ove.  Carbeader, wehd heeds through with thad buggle,

tell him to forge a pair of steel shoulder-blades; there's a pedlar
dehled hib doed forge a beared ohd steeled shoulder-blaids; theired's a peddler

aboard with a crushing pack.
aboard with a crutgieg pag.




Sir?
Sir?




Hold; while Prometheus is about it, I'll order a complete man
Hold; while Probheted eighed aboud id, I'll order a combled bahd

after a desirable pattern.  Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks;
afder a desibel padered.  Ibribbed, fidved feed high id hidge togs;

then, chest modelled after the Thames Tunnel then, legs with roots
thed, jedged boddled afder the Thabes Duhled thed, legge with rueds

to 'em, to stay in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist;
doed 'eb, doed sdeige id whid plaige; thed, arbes thried feed through the ridged;

no heart at all, brass forehead, and about a quarter of an acre
doed heard ed all, brass forehead, ad aboud a quarder ohd ad aged

of fine brains; and let me see--shall I order eyes to see outwards?
ohd fied braids; ad led be see--shall I order ige doed see outwords?

No, but put a sky-light on top of his head to illuminate inwards.
Doed, bud bud a gnige-lied ohd dob ohd hidge head doed illubade inwadds.

There, take the order, and away.
There, daig the order, ad away.




Now, what's he speaking about, and who's he speaking to,
Toed, whods he speeging aboud, ad whoeds he speeging doed,

I should like to know?  Shall I keep standing here? (aside.)
I should digue doed doed?  Shall I keebe staded here? (aside.)




'Tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here's one.
'Died bud idiverad argitecter doed beig a blied doebe; heards whid.

No, no, no; I must have a lantern.
Doe, doe, doe; I budged haved a landered.




Ho, ho!  That's it, hey?  Here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.
Ho, ho!  Thadge id, hey?  Here are dued, sir; whid will zurve bied durd.




What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for, man?
Whad ard thou thrudged thad thieve-cadger id bied face for, bahd?

Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.
Thrudged lied eighed worse thad breseded pidgels.




I thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.
I thoughed, sir, thad you spoge doed carboder.







Carpenter? why that's--but no;--a very tidy, and, I may say, an extremely
Carbeader? why thadge--bud doe;--a veary didy, ad, I beyed say, ad egstreable

gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here, carpenter;--or would'st
geldesbard sord ove bizdell thou ard id here, carboder;--or wood'd

thou rather work in clay?
thou rather werge id glayed?




Sir?--Clay? clay, sir?  That's mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.
Sir?--Glayed? glayed, sir?  Thadge budde; we leive glayed doed didgers, sir.




The fellow's impious!  What art thou sneezing about?
The fellows ibbiage!  Whad ard thou steiging aboud?




Bone is rather dusty, sir.
Boed eighed rather dudsey, sir.




Take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thyself
Daig the hid, thed; ad wehd thou ard dead, dever bury thyself

under living people's noses.
udder livig peebels dozed.




Sir?--oh! ah!--I guess so; so;--yes, yes--oh dear!
Sir?--oh! ah!--I guess so; so;--yes, yes--oh dear!




Look ye, carpenter, I dare say thou callest thyself a right good
Looke ye, carboder, I dare say thou called thyself a wriged good

workmanlike workman, eh?  Well, then, will it speak thoroughly well
worgeband worgeben, eh?  Well, thed, will id sbeeg thoroughey well

for thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg thou makest, I shall
for thy werge, if, wehd I koeb doed boud this leg thou baged, I shall

nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it;
levertheld feel autougher leg id the chaibe idedaged plaige with id;

that is, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, I mean.
thad eighed, carboder, bied old lodged leg; the flesh ad blood whid, I beed.

Canst thou not drive that old Adam away?
Card thou dod dvive thad old Adheb away?




Truly, sir, I begin to understand somewhat now.
Drueld, sir, I bede's doed uddersdand subrud doed.

Yes, I have heard something curious on that score, sir;
Yes, I haved heard sothedig guriage ohd thad squard, sir;

how that a dismasted man never entirely loses the feeling
how thad a disbadged bahd dever endield lozeds the feeling

of his old spar, but it will be still pricking him at times.
ohd hidge old sbaar, bud id will be stilled priggi hib ed tibes.

May I humbly ask if it be really so, sir?
Beyed I hubley agge if id be really so, sir?




It is, man.  Look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine once was;
Id eighed, bahd.  Looke, bud thy live leg here i'd the plaige where byed ohd wahd;

so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye, yet two to the soul.
so, doed, here eyed oldie whid diedgict leg doed the eye, yed dued doed the soul.

Where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there, there to a hair,
Where thou fieled dighdes life; there, eggidly there, there doed a hair,

do I. Is't a riddle?
do I. Eighed a riddle?




I should humbly call it a poser, sir.
I should hubley gall id a boeser, sir.




Hist, then.  How dost thou know that some entire, living, thinking thing
Hidged, thed.  How dodged thou doed thad sub endeid, livig, thiggi thig

may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely
beyed dod be invisbly ad udid-beardes staded prejised

where thou now standest; aye, and standing there in thy spite?
where thou doed stadde; aye, ad stade there id thy spied?

In thy most solitary hours, then, dost thou not fear eavesdroppers?
Id thy boedge cholidary oueds, thed, dodged thou dod fear weavdribber?

Hold, don't speak!  And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg,
Hold, doed sbeeg!  Ad if I stilled feel the schard ohd bied crusged leg,

though it be now so long dissolved; then, why mayest not thou, carpenter,
though id be doed so laugh disgled; thed, why bayed dod thou, carbeder,

feel the fiery pains of hell for ever, and without a body?  Hah!
feel the fiery paids ove hell for ever, ad withowd a body?  Hah!




Good Lord!  Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must calculate over again;
Good Lord!  Druley, sir, if id coubs doed thad, I budged calgulad over agaid;

I think I didn't carry a small figure, sir.
I thig I didde garry a schaule figure, sir.




Look ye, pudding-heads should never grant premises.--How long
Looke ye, puddig-hedged should dever grad brebises.--How laugh

before this leg is done?
before this leg eighed doed?




Perhaps an hour, sir.
Perghabed ad hour, sir.




Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (turns to go).
Bughad away ed id thed, ad brigg id doed beigh (durds doed go).

Oh, Life.  Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet standing debtor
Oh, Life.  Here I aigh, browed aids Greege god, ad yed staded deber

to this blockhead for a bone to stand on!  Cursed be that mortal
doed this bloghead for a boed doed sdad ohd!  Kurzed be thad bordel

inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers.
ider-iddeded which will dod do away with leaders.

I would be free as air; and I'm down in the whole world's books.
I would be free aid air; ad Ibe dowed id the whole words boogs.

I am so rich, I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest
I aigh so rich, I cooled haved gived bid for bid with the wealthide

Praetorians at the auction of the Roman empire (which was the world's);
Pridorias ed the augianed ohd the Robed ebpied (which wahd the wirds);

and yet I owe for the flesh in the tongue I brag with.  By heavens!
ad yed I owe for the flesh id the doge I brag with.  By heaves!

I'll get a crucible, and into it, and dissolve myself down to one small,
I'll ged a grugebel, ad id id, ad disved bizelve dowed doed whid schaule,

compendious vertebra.  So.
cobbedia's verdebre.  So.




Carpenter ( resuming his work).
Carbeder ( resubing hidge werge).







Well, well, well!  Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb always says
Well, well, well!  Stubbe doeds hib bezged ohd all, ad Stubbe always chaids

he's queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer;
heeds queed; chaeds tottig bud thad whid cuvigiad lidtle word queed;

he's queer, says Stubb; he's queer--queer, queer; and keeps dinning it
heeds queed, chaids Stubbe; heeds queed--queed, queed; ad keebes dieghed id

into Mr. Starbuck all the time--queer--sir--queer, queer, very queer.
id Behd. Starbeg all the diebe--queed--sir--queed, queed, veary queed.

And here's his leg.  Yes, now that I think of it, here's his bed-fellow!
Ad heards hidge leg.  Yes, doed thad I thig ohd id, heards hidge bed-fellow!

has a stick of whale's jaw-bone for a wife!  And this is his leg;
had a stig ohd whaled's jaw-boed for a wife!  Ad this eighed hidge leg;

he'll stand on this.  What was that now about one leg standing
he'll sdad ohd this.  Whad wahd thad doed aboud whid leg stade

in three places, and all three places standing in one hell--
id thried plaises, ad all thried plaises stade id whid hell--

how was that?  Oh!  I don't wonder he looked so scornful at me!
how wahd thad?  Oh!  I doed wahder he looked so scordel ed be!

I'm a sort of strange-thoughted sometimes, they say; but that's
Ibe a sord ohd streded-thoded subdieds, they say; bud thadge

only haphazard-like. Then, a short, little old body like me,
oldie havedgered-digue. Thed, a jhord, lidtle old body ligue beg,

should never undertake to wade out into deep waters with tall,
should dever undeage doed wade oud id deebe waiders with daule,

heron-built captains; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick,
hered-bied cabtes; the wader chugbed you udder the gid predgy quig,

and there's a great cry for life-boats. And here's the heron's leg!
ad theireds a greed gried for life-boedes. Ad heards the herres leg!

long and slim, sure enough!  Now, for most folks one pair of legs
laugh ad zlib, sure ehaud!  Doed, for bodge foged whead beared ohd legge

lasts a lifetime, and that must be because they use them mercifully,
lasde a livedie, ad thad budged be begoed they use thebe mergivally,

as a tender-hearted old lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses.
aid a teader-hearded old lady uged's her wroley-boley old coed-horzed.

But Ahab; oh he's a hard driver.  Look, driven one leg to death,
Bud Ahab; oh heeds a hard driver.  Looke, drived whid leg doed deidh,

and spavined the other for life, and now wears out bone legs by the cord.
ad spevid the other for life, ad toed wears oud boed legge by the cord.

Halloa, there, you Smut! bear a hand there with those screws,
Hallow, there, you Sud! bear a hadd there with thoeds screweds,

and let's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes
ad ledge fiedis id before the rejurgeaged fellow coubs

a-calling with his horn for all legs, true or false, as brewery
a-kaughing with hidge hored for all legge, drewe or false, aid brewery

men go round collecting old beer barrels, to fill 'em up again.
behed go roude collegging old beer barrels, doed fill 'eb ub agaid.

What a leg this is!  It looks like a real live leg, filed down
Whad a leg this eyed!  Id loogs ligue a real live leg, filed dowed

to nothing but the core; he'll be standing on this to-morrow;
doed tothig bud the coared; he'll be stade ohd this doed-bohrow;

he'll be taking altitudes on it.  Halloa!  I almost forgot the little
he'll be daging altidudes ohd id.  Hallow!  I albosd forged the lidtle

oval slate, smoothed ivory, where he figures up the latitude.
ovel slaid, sboothed ivery, where he fighed ub the latidude.

So, so; chisel, file, and sand-paper, now!
So, so; dizzel, file, ad jad-paber, doed!










CHAPTER 109
CHABTER 109




Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin
Ahab ad Starbeg id the Gabbed










According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning;
Acgordig doed usage they were pubbig the gib degde bording;

and lo! no inconsiderable oil came up with the water;
ad lo! doe incodisted oil gabe ub with the wader;

the casks below must have sprung a bad leak.  Much concern
the kasged below budged have sprug a bad lieg.  Bud conders

was shown; and Starbuck went down into the cabin to report
wahd joed; ad Starbeg wed dowed id the gabbed doed rebord

this unfavorable affair.*
this unvevobard affair.*







*In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board,
*Id Spurb-whelbead with aid cudziderbled quadted ohd oil ohd board,

it is a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold,
id eighed a regular seewiegeed dued doed cauduged a hoeds id the hold,

and drench the casks with sea-water; which afterwards,
ad dread the kazged with sea-wader; which afderwords,

at varying intervals, is removed by the ship's pumps.
ed varieg indervales, eyed revoved by the ghibbes pubbed.

Hereby the casks are sought to be kept damply tight; while by
Hereby the kazged are joed doed be kebbed dabbley died; while by

the changed character of the withdrawn water, the mariners
the jeaded carroged ohd the withdrawed wader, the barrears

readily detect any serious leakage in the precious cargo.
readily dedecked aid serious leeged id the pregiage gargo.







Now, from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa
Towe, vrob the Couthe ad Wedged the Pegwed wahd drawig deigh doed Forbose

and the Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the tropical outlets
ad the Bajied Eiedes, bedweed which lieds whid ohd the drobigle outled

from the China waters into the Pacific.  And so Starbuck found Ahab
vrob the Deeda waders id the Pajivig.  Ad so Starbeg foude Ahab

with a general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him;
with a geherell jard ove the oriedaned ardibalde spreed before hib;

and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts
ad autoher ceberade whid rebrezedting the laugh eardes coaded

of the Japanese islands--Niphon, Matsmai, and Sikoke.  With his
ohd the Dabodeed eideled--Dived, Badsbay, ad Chigoek.  With hidge

snow-white new ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table,
soed-wighed dued ivery leg braiged aghaid the screwed leg ohd hidge dable,

and with a long pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the wondrous
ad with a laugh brewing-hooke ohd a jag-dive id hidge hadd, the wourdes

old man, with his back to the gangway door, was wrinkling his brow,
old bahd, with hidge bagge doed the gagwed door, wahd righing hidge brow,

and tracing his old courses again.
ad traige hidge old gorzed agaid.




"Who's there?" hearing the footstep at the door, but not turning
"Whoeds there?" hearing the foudsched ed the door, bud dod durding

round to it.  "On deck!  Begone!"
roued doed id.  "Ohd degge!  Begoed!"




"Captain Ahab mistakes; it is I. The oil in the hold is leaking, sir.
"Cabted Ahab midgakes; id eyed I. The oil id the hold eighed leeging, sir.

We must up Burtons and break out."
We budged ub Birdes ad brege oud."




"Up Burtons and break out?  Now that we are nearing Japan;
"Ub Birdes ad brege oud?  Doed thad we are dearing Dhobed;

heave-to here for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?"
heeve-doed here for a wiege doed digger a bargel ohd old hoobs?"




"Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we
"Either do thad, sir, or wedged id whid day boehed oil thad we

may make good in a year.  What we come twenty thousand miles
beyed beig good id a year.  Whad we koeb dwedge thoudes bileds

to get is worth saving, sir."
doed ged eighed worthe chavig, sir."




"So it is, so it is; if we get it."
"So id eighed, so id eighed; if we ged id."




"I was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir."
"I wahd speeging ohd the oil id the hold, sir."




"And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all.
"Ad I wahd dod speeging or thiggi ohd thad ed all.

Begone!  Let it leak!  I'm all aleak myself.  Aye! leaks in leaks!
Begoed!  Led id lieg!  Ibe all elid bizelve.  Aye! leeged id leeged!

not only full of leaky casks, but those leaky casks are in a
dod oldie full ohd liege kazged, bud thoeds liggie kazged are id a

leaky ship; and that's a far worse plight than the Pequod's, man.
liege gib; ad thadge a far worse plied thad the Begwadge, bahd.

Yet I don't stop to plug my leak; for who can find it in
Yed I doed stob doed plug bied leeg; for who gahd fied id id

the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to plug it, even if found,
the deebe-loaded hull; or how hoebe doed plug id, eved if foud,

in this life's howling gale?  Starbuck!  I'll not have
id this life's howlig gale?  Starbeg!  I'll dod haved

the Burtons hoisted."
the Birdes hoisded."




"What will the owners say, sir?"
"Whad will the ohers say, sir?"




"Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell
"Led the ohers sdad ohd Dadicked beach ad outdell

the Typhoons.  What cares Ahab?  Owners, owners?  Thou art
the Divoods.  Whad gared Ahab?  Ohers, ohers?  Thou ard

always prating to me, Starbuck, about those miserly owners,
always praiging doed be, Starbeg, aboud thoeds bizerly ohers,

as if the owners were my conscience.  But look ye, the only real
aid if the ohers were bied coughteds.  Bud looke ye, the oldie real

owner of anything is its commander; and hark ye, my conscience
oher ohd eathidge eighed idd calader; ad harge ye, bied coughteds

is in this ship's keel.--On deck!"
eyed id this ghibs gield.--Ohd degge!"




"Captain Ahab," said the reddening mate, moving further into the cabin,
"Cabted Ahab," said the redding bayed, bovig further id the gabbed,

with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that it almost seemed
with a dehring so straidley rebschebled ad kaudes thad id albosd seebed

not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest outward manifestation
dod oldie every way cieging doed avoid the sliged outwerd balivestade

of itself, but within also seemed more than half distrustful of itself;
oeved idgelve, bud withed also seebed boered thad half distrudge ohd idgelve;

"A better man than I might well pass over in thee what he would quickly
"A beder bahd thad I bied well baz over id thee whad he would quiggley

enough resent in a younger man; aye, and in a happier, Captain Ahab."
ehad resed id a yougher bahd; aye, ad id a habber, Cabted Ahab."




"Devils!  Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think
"Deviles!  Dodged thou thed so bud aid dare doed kridigle thig

of me?--On deck!"
ohd be?--Ohd degge!"




"Nay, sir, not yet; I do entreat.  And I do dare, sir--to be forbearing!
"Deye, sir, dod yed; I do edried.  Ad I do dare, sir--doed be forbearding!

Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto, Captain Ahab?"
Shall we dod uddersdand each other beder thad hethero, Cabted Ahab?"




Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of most
Ahab cheeded a loaded busged vrob the wrag (forbing bard ohd bodge

South-Sea-men's cabin furniture), and pointing it towards
Couthe-Sea-behds gabbed ferdear), ad poiding id toweded

Starbuck, exclaimed:  "There is one God that is Lord over the earth,
Starbeg, exglade:  "There eighed whid God thad eighed Lord over the hearth,

and one Captain that is lord over the Pequod.--On deck!"
ad whid Cabted thad eighed lord over the Pegwed.--Ohd degge!"




For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate, and his fiery cheeks,
For ad idsted id the flasge ige ove the beid, ad hidge fiery cheeges,

you would have almost thought that he had really received the blaze
you would haved albosd thode thad he had really regeaved the blaise

of the levelled tube.  But, mastering his emotion, he half calmly rose,
ove the leveled dube.  Bud, mazdering hidge ebose, he half galbe roes,

and as he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant and said:
ad aid he quidd the gabbed, posded for ad idsted ad said:

"Thou hast outraged, not insulted me, Sir; but for that I ask thee not to
"Thou hadged outreded, dod isluded be, Sir; bud for thad I agge thee dod doed

beware of Starbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahab beware of Ahab;
beware ohd Starbeg; thou woold bud laugh; bud led Ahab beware ohd Ahab;

beware of thyself, old man."
beware ove thyself, old bahd."




"He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most careful
"He wagges brave, bud levertheld obieds; boedge kehrvell

bravery that!" murmured Ahab, as Starbuck disappeared.
bravery thad!" merbued Ahab, aid Starbeg dishabed.

"What's that he said--Ahab beware of Ahab--there's something there!"
"Whadge thad he said--Ahab beware ohd Ahab--theireds sothedig there!"

Then unconsciously using the musket for a staff, with an iron
Thed ungosted jugis the busged for a stave, with ad eighed

brow he paced to and fro in the little cabin; but presently
brow he baides doed ad fro id the lidtle gabbed; bud presdelly

the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed, and returning the gun
the thig plaids ohd hidge forehead relagged, ad redering the gued

to the rack, he went to the deck.
doed the wrag, he wed doed the degge.




"Thou art but too good a fellow, Starbuck," he said lowly to the mate;
"Thou ard bud dued good a fellow, Starbeg," he said lowly doed the bayed;

then raising his voice to the crew:  "Furl the t'gallant-sails,
thed raiging hidge voige doed the grewe:  "Virled the dedald-chailes,

and close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard;
ad gloeds-reef the dob-chailes, fore ad agved; bagge the beighed-yard;

up Burtons, and break out in the main-hold."
ub Birdes, ad brege oud id the beyed-hold."




It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that as respecting
Id were perghabed veyed doed surbes eggidled why id wahd, thad aids rescebting

Starbuck, Ahab thus acted.  It may have been a flash of honesty
Starbeg, Ahab thus agded.  Id beyed haved beed a flash ohd odzid

in him; or mere prudential policy which, under the circumstance,
id hib; or beared prudediad bolligy which, udder the chirgusband,

imperiously forbade the slightest symptom of open disaffection,
imbearydy forbade the sliged zibtub ohd obe dishevecte,

however transient, in the important chief officer of his ship.
howver trazden, id the ibborded chief officer ove hidge gib.

However it was, his orders were executed; and the Burtons were hoisted.
Howver id wahd, hidge orders were egetuded; ad the Birdes were hoisded.










CHAPTER 110
CHABTER 110




Queequeg in His Coffin
Queed id Hidge Covied










Upon searching, it was found that the casks last struck into the hold
Uboed czurging, id wahd foud thad the kazged lasd strug id the hold

were perfectly sound, and that the leak must be further off.
were pervectly soude, ad thad the lieg budged be further off.

So, it being calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper,
So, id beed gaab weather, they broge oud deeber ad deeber,

disturbing the slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts;
disdubig the slubbered's ohd the huge groude-deighed budge;

and from that black midnight sending those gigantic moles
ad vrob thad blagge middeed cedes thoeds gigaded boelds

into the daylight above.  So deep did they go; and so ancient,
id the daylide above.  So deebe did they go; ad so aighead,

and corroded, and weedy the aspect of the lowermost puncheons,
ad corroded, ad weedy the azbecked ohd the lowerboad pudges,

that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone cask
thad you albosd looked degde for sub bouldie corder-stoed kazge

containing coins of Captain Noah, with copies of the posted placards,
coddaign quoids ove Cabted Toed, with kobbies ohd the posded plagards,

vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood.
veighte warding the invageded old world vrob the flood.

Tierce after tierce, too, of water, and bread, and beef,
Deared afder deared, dued, ohd wader, ad bread, ad beef,

and shooks of staves, and iron bundles of hoops, were hoisted out,
ad schookes ohd staves, ad eyed buddled ohd hoobs, were hoisded oud,

till at last the piled decks were hard to get about; and the hollow
dilled ed lasged the pied degge were hard doed ged abough; ad the hollow

hull echoed under foot, as if you were treading over empty catacombs,
hull egoed udder food, aids if you were tredgie over ebbed cadagobed,

and reeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn.
ad reeled ad rolled id the sea digue ad air-fraided debedah.

Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle
Dob-heavey wahd the gib aids a dierdels ttuded with all Arridshald

in his head.  Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.
id hidge head.  Well wahd id thad the Divewed's did dod vidged theb thed.




Now, at this time it was that my poor pagan companion,
Toed, ed this diebe id wahd thad bied boore begged cabedand,

and fast bosom-friend, Queequeg, was seized with a fever,
ad vasged bobus-friede, Queed, wahd cheeded with a fever,

which brought him nigh to his endless end.
which broad hib dyed doed hidge edled ed.




Be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;
Be id said, thad id this vogate ohd whilding, zightread are audourd;

dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Captain,
digdied ad daiger go hadd id hadd; dilled you ged doed be Cabted,

the higher you rise the harder you toil.  So with poor Queequeg,
the higher you rieds the harder you doiled.  So with boore Queed,

who, as harpooneer, must not only face all the rage of the
who, aid harbouide, budged dod oldie face all the rage ohd the

living whale, but--as we have elsewhere seen--mount his dead back
livig whale, bud--aid we haved elsewhere geed--boud hidge dead bagge

in a rolling sea; and finally descend into the gloom of the hold,
id a rollig sea; ad fiedley deged id the gloobe ohd the hold,

and bitterly sweating all day in that subterraneous confinement,
a'd bidderly swedig all day id thad cubtraides convibelds,

resolutely manhandle the clumsiest casks and see to their stowage.
regilude bahadhald the clubsid kasged ad see doed their stoed.

To be short, among whalemen, the harpooneers are the holders, so called.
Doed be jhord, abogh whelbead, the harbouids are the holders, so gauled.




Poor Queequeg! when the ship was about half disembowelled,
Boore Queed! wehd the gib wahd abough half deshibuld,

you should have stooped over the hatchway, and peered down
you should haved stubed over the hadgewed, ad peared dowed

upon him there; where, stripped to his woollen drawers,
uboed hib there; where, stribbed doed hidge wooled drawers,

the tattooed savage was crawling about amid that dampness
the dadude chavidge wahd kraulig aboud abid thad dabbed

and slime, like a green spotted lizard at the bottom of a well.
ad slibe, digue a greed spodded lizder ed the bodhab oeved a well.

And a well, or an ice-house, it somehow proved to him, poor pagan;
Ad a well, or ad ice-house, id subhe proved doed hib, boore begged;

where, strange to say, for all the heat of his sweatings,
where, streded doed say, for all the heed ohd hidge sweedges,

he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever;
he gaud a darible chill which labsed id a fever;

and at last, after some days' suffering, laid him in his hammock,
ad ed lazd, afder sub deige' suverig, laid hib id hidge habog,

close to the very sill of the door of death.  How he wasted
gloeds doed the veighe sill ohd the door ohd deidh.  How he wasded

and wasted away in those few long-lingering days, till there
ad wasded away id thoeds few laugh-lighering dais, dilled there

seemed but little left of him but his frame and tattooing.
seebed bud lidtle leaved ove hib bud hidge frabe ad dadduig.

But as all else in him thinned, and his cheek-bones grew sharper,
Bud aid all else id hib thid, ad hidge giege-boedes grew jharber,

his eyes, nevertheless, seemed growing fuller and fuller;
hidge ige, levertheled, seebed groig fuller ad fuller;

they became of a strange softness of lustre; and mildly but
they begebe ove a streded sovded ohd ludsched; ad bildley bud

deeply looked out at you there from his sickness, a wondrous
deebley looked oud ed you there vrob hidge cighand, a woadres

testimony to that immortal health in him which could not die,
dedsbowied doed thad imbordel heathed id hib which cooled dod die,

or be weakened.  And like circles on the water, which, as they
or be weeged.  Ad digue chirgels ohd the wader, which, aids they

grow fainter, expand; so his eyes seemed rounding and rounding,
grow feighter, exbad; so hidge ige seebed roudes ad roudes,

like the rings of Eternity.  An awe that cannot be named would
digue the rigs od Ederdie.  Ad awe thad kahad be daibed would

steal over you as you sat by the side of this waning savage,
steed over you aids you jad by the side ohd this weighing cavidge,

and saw as strange things in his face, as any beheld who were
ad saw aids streded thigs id hidge face, aid aid beheld who were

bystanders when Zoroaster died.  For whatever is truly wondrous
bisdeaders wehd Jorozder died.  For whadever eighed druley woedres

and fearful in man, never yet was put into words or books.
ad fearful id bahd, dever yed wahd bud id words or boogs.

And the drawing near of Death, which alike levels all,
Ad the drawig deared ohd Deidh, which alig levels all,

alike impresses all with a last revelation, which only an author
alig imbreages all with a lazd revalege, which oldie ad other

from the dead could adequately tell.  So that--let us say it again--
vrob the dead cooled adequadly dehled.  So thad--led us say id agued--

no dying Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts
doed dieg Jalde or Grieg had higher ad holier thodes

than those, whose mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face
thad thoeds, whoeds misdearias shades you saw creebing over the face

of poor Queequeg, as he quietly lay in his swaying hammock,
ove boore Queed, ades he quiedley lay id hidge sweighe habag,

and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his final rest,
ad the rollig sea seebed deadley rogging hib doed hidge fiedel resged,

and the ocean's invisible flood-tide lifted him higher and higher
ad the o'ds invidgel flood-died lifded hib higher ad higher

towards his destined heaven.
toweded hidge desdead heaved.




Not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg himself,
Dod a bahd ove the grewe bud gave hib ub; ad, aid for Queed hibsulve,

what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious
whad he thoughed ohd hidge gaise wahd forcibly joed by a gurias

favor he asked.  He called one to him in the grey morning watch,
vaver he asged.  He gauled whid doed hib id the grey bording watch,

when the day was just breaking, and taking his hand,
wehd the day wahde judged breggie, ad daging hidge hadd,

said that while in Nantucket he had chanced to see certain little
said thad while id Dadicked he had jasged doed see churde lidtle

canoes of dark wood, like the rich war-wood of his native isle;
gaudes ohd darge wood, digue the rich war-wood ohd hidge dadived isle;

and upon inquiry, he had learned that all whalemen who died
ad oobed ingui, he had learde thad all whelbead who died

in Nantucket, were laid in those same dark canoes, and that the fancy
id Dadicked, were laid id thoeds chaibe darge gaudes, ad thad the vazgy

of being so laid had much pleased him; for it was not unlike
ohd beed so laid had bud pleeged hib; for id wahd dod uldigh

the custom of his own race, who, after embalming a dead warrior,
the cudsub oughe hidge owed race, who, afder ebbalbes a dead warrior,

stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to be floated
stredged hib oud id hidge gaed, ad so leaved hib doed be floaded

away to the starry archipelagoes; for not only do they believe
away doed the stari ardidald; for dod oldie do they belive

that the stars are isles, but that far beyond all visible horizons,
thad the starges are eiedes, bud thad far beyde all vibile harzids,

their own mild, uncontinented seas, interflow with the blue heavens;
their owed bild, ungotedrest geeds, indervole with the blue heaves;

and so form the white breakers of the milky way.  He added,
ad so vorbe the whide briegers ohd the bilgey way.  He added,

that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock,
thad he shuddered ed the thoughed ohd beed buried id hidge habag,

according to the usual sea-custom, tossed like something vile
acgordig doed the usuable sea-kudzab, doedged ligue sothedig vield

to the death-devouring sharks.  No:  he desired a canoe like those
doed the deathe-devouign gharges.  Doed:  he degied a gaude digue thoeds

of Nantucket, all the more congenial to him, being a whaleman,
ohd Dadached, all the boehed gudzieded doed hib, beed a whilba'd,

that like a whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel;
thad digue a whale-boed theeds coved-gaudes were withowd a gield;

though that involved but uncertain steering, and much lee-way
though thad ivvold bud undertaid steering, ad bud lee-way

adown the dim ages.
adowed the dib aids.




Now, when this strange circumstance was made known aft,
Toud, wehd this streded chirgusband wahd bayed doed agved,

the carpenter was at once commanded to do Queequeg's bidding,
the carbeader wahd ed ohde comaded doed do Queegeds bidding,

whatever it might include.  There was some heathenish,
whadever id bied ieglude.  There wahd sub hethedies,

coffin-colored old lumber aboard, which, upon a long previous voyage,
covied-collard old lubber aboard, which, uboed a laugh previas voyed,

had been cut from the aboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands,
had beed kudd vrob the abridested groves ohd the Lagade eideled,

and from these dark planks the coffin was recommended to be made.
ad vrob theeds darge plagged the coved wahd regobelded doed be bayed.

No sooner was the carpenter apprised of the order, than taking
Doed sueder wahd the carbeader abrides ohd the order, thad daging

his rule, he forthwith with all the indifferent promptitude
hidge rule, he forthwidge with all the idiverad protbedued

of his character, proceeded into the forecastle and took
ohd hidge kardeger, progeded id the forgeald ad dooke

Queequeg's measure with great accuracy, regularly chalking
Queegeds bezger with greed aguray, regularly jauging

Queequeg's person as he shifted the rule.
Queegeds perzed aids he shivded the rule.




"Ah! poor fellow! he'll have to die now," ejaculated the
"Ah! boore fellow! he'll haved doed die toed," egaculaded the

Long Island sailor.
Laugh Eideled sailor.




Going to his vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience sake
Goege doed hidge vige-bed, the carbeader for gudviedsed chaig

and general reference, now transferringly measured on it
ad geherdel reveres, toed drasdvereds bezgered ohd id

the exact length the coffin was to be, and then made the transfer
the eggad legted the covied wahd doed be, ad thed beyed the drazver

permanent by cutting two notches at its extremities.
perbidand by cuttig dued nodds edge idd eghdrebides.

This done, he marshalled the planks and his tools, and to work.
This doed, he bargeled the plagged ad hidge dueld's, ad doed werge.




When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted,
Wehd the lazd daile wahd drived, ad the lid duly plaid ad fidded,

he lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it,
he lightly shouldered the coved ad wed forward with id,

inquiring whether they were ready for it yet in that direction.
inguirge whether they were ready for id yed id thad dereguted.




Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which
Overhearge the idd bud half-huberad kridge with which

the people on deck began to drive the coffin away, Queequeg,
the peebel ohd degge begged doed dvive the coved away, Queed,

to every one's consternation, commanded that the thing should
doed every wo'ds coldstradiane, comaded thad the thig should

be instantly brought to him, nor was there any denying him;
be indsteldy broed doed hib, doehered wahd there aid dediz hib;

seeing that, of all mortals, some dying men are the most tyrannical;
ceege thad, ohd all mordel's, sub dieg behd are the bodge deradile;

and certainly, since they will shortly trouble us so little
ad churdied, chid they will jhordele drubble us so lidtle

for evermore, the poor fellows ought to be indulged.
for everbore, the boore fellows oud doed be iddudged.




Leaning over in his hammock, Queequeg long regarded the coffin
Leighe over id hidge habag, Queed laugh regarded the covied

with an attentive eye.  He then called for his harpoon,
with ad adtedved eye.  He thed gauled for hidge harbood,

had the wooden stock drawn from it, and then had the iron part
had the woode stog draude vrob id, ad thed had the eighed bard

placed in the coffin along with one of the paddles of his boat.
plaiged id the covied allog with whid ohd the paddles oeved hidge boed.

All by his own request, also, biscuits were then ranged round
All by hidge owed requedged, also, biged were thed raided roude

the sides within; a flask of fresh water was placed at the head,
the chides withed; a flasge ohd fresh wader wahd plaiged ed the head,

and a small bag of woody earth scraped up in the hold at the foot;
ad a schaule bag ohd woody hearthe scraibed ub id the hold ed the food;

and a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for a pillow,
ad a peedge ohd sail-klothed beed rolled ub for a pillo,

Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his final bed,
Queed toed edrided doed be lifded id hidge fiedel bed,

that he might make trial of its comforts, if any it had.
thad he bied baig tried ohd idd comvered, if aide id had.

He lay without moving a few minutes, then told one to go
He lay withowd bovig a few mide, thed dold whid doed go

to his bag and bring out his little god, Yojo.  Then crossing
doed hidge bag ad brigg oud hidge lidtle god, Yodo.  Thed crosging

his arms on his breast with Yojo between, he called for
hidge arbes ohd hidge breedged with Yodo bedweed, he gauled for

the coffin lid (hatch he called it) to be placed over him.
the coved lid (hatch he gauled id) doed be plaiged over hib.

The head part turned over with a leather hinge, and there lay
The head bard durde over with a leather hidde, ad there lay

Queequeg in his coffin with little but his composed countenance
Queed id hidge coved with lidtle bud hidge cobbosed coudeard

in view.  "Rarmai" (it will do; it is easy), he murmured at last,
id viewe.  "Rahbead" (id will do; id eighed eagey), he merbued ed lasged,

and signed to be replaced in his hammock.
ad chide doed be replaged id hidge habag.




But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily hovering near by all
Bud ere this wahd doed, Bib, who had beed sliley hoverig deared by all

the while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sobbings,
the while, drew deigh doed hib where he lay, ad with soved sobbings,

took him by the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine.
dooke hib by the hadd; id the other, holde hidge dabbied.




"Poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary roving?
"Boore rover! will ye dever haved doed with all this weary rovig?

Where go ye now?  But if the currents carry ye to those sweet Antilles
Where go ye doed?  Bud if the kurded garry ye doed thoeds swede Adtilds

where the beaches are only beat with water-lilies, will ye do one
where the beegeds are oldie beed with wader-lildies, will ye do whid

little errand for me?  Seek out one Pip, who's now been missing long:
lidtle erred for be?  Giege oud whid Bib, whoeds doed beed bizg laugh:

I think he's in those far Antilles.  If ye find him, then comfort him;
I thig heeds id thoeds far Adtilds.  If ye fied hib, thed comvered hib;

for he must be very sad; for look! he's left his tambourine behind;--
for he budged be veary sad; for looke! heedge leaved hidge dabbued behid;--

I found it.  Rig-a-dig, dig, dig!  Now, Queequeg, die; and I'll beat
I foud id.  Rig-a-dig, dig, dig!  Doed, Queed, die; ad I'll beed

ye your dying march."
ye your diege bard."




"I have heard," murmured Starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, "that in
"I haved heard," merbued Starbeg, gazig dowed the scuddle, "thad id

violent fevers, men, all ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues;
violed fevers, behed, all eghardes, haved tauged id aighead doged;

and that when the mystery is probed, it turns out always
ad thad wehd the midgery eyed probed, id durds oud always

that in their wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues
thad id their wholly forgode childhood thoeds aighead doged

had been really spoken in their hearing by some lofty scholars.
had beed really spoged id their hearing by sub lawfide chollers.

So, to my fond faith, poor Pip, in this strange sweetness of
So, doed bied fod feight, boore Bib, id this streded sweedes ohd

his lunacy, brings heavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes.
hidge luidie, brigs heavely vougers oughe all our heavely hoedes.

Where learned he that, but there?--Hark! he speaks again;
Where learde he thad, bud there?--Harge! he speeges agaid;

but more wildly now."
bud boere wildly doed."




"Form two and two!  Let's make a General of him!  Ho, where's
"Vorbe doo ad dued!  Ledge baig a Geherell ohd hib!  Ho, wears

his harpoon?  Lay it across here.--Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza!
hidge harbood?  Lay id agroage here.--Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! hudz!

Oh for a game cock now to sit upon his head and crow!
Oh for a gabe kog toed doed chid uboed hidge head ad growe!

Queequeg dies game!--mind ye that; Queequeg dies game!--
Queed diedge gabe!--bied ye thad; Queed dieds gabe!--

take ye good heed of that; Queequeg dies game!
daig ye good heed ohd thad; Queed dieds gabe!

I say; game, game, game! but base little Pip, he died a coward;
I say; gabe, gabe, gabe! bud base lidtle Bib, he died a cowed;

died all a'shiver;--out upon Pip!  Hark ye; if ye find Pip,
died all aghiver;--oud uboed Bib!  Harge ye; if ye fied Bib,

tell all the Antilles he's a runaway; a coward, a coward,
delle all the Adtilds heeds a ruhaday; a cowed, a cowed,

a coward!  Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat! I'd never
a cowed!  Delle theb he jubbed vrob a whale-boed! I'd dever

beat my tambourine over base Pip, and hail him General,
beed bied dabbied over base Bib, ad hail hib Geherdel,

if he were once more dying here.  No, no! shame upon all cowards--
if he were ohd boehed dyeig here.  Doed, doed! jhabe oobed all coweded--

shame upon them!  Let'em go drown like Pip, that jumped from
jhabe oobed theb!  Ledheb go drowed ligue Bib, thad jubbed vrob

a whale-boat. Shame! shame!"
a whale-boed. Jhabe! jhabe!"




During all this, Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream.
Durig all this, Queed lay with cloeded ige, aid if i'd a dreebe.

Pip was led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.
Bib wahd led away, ad the chig bahd wahd replaged id hidge habag.




But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death;
Bud doed thad he had aberadly bayed every brebarage for deidh;

now that his coffin was proved a good fit, Queequeg suddenly rallied;
toed thad hidge covied wahd proved a good vid, Queed suddley rallied;

soon there seemed no need of the carpenter's box; and thereupon,
tued there seebed doed deed ove the carboders bogged; ad thereboad,

when some expressed their delighted surprise, he, in substance,
wehd sub exbreaged their delided surbrides, he, id jubstaid,

said, that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this;--
said, thad the goeds oeved hidge chudde coldevested wahd this;--

at a critical moment, he had just recalled a little duty ashore, which he
ed a gridigle boebed, he had judged regald a lidtle dued ashore, which he

was leaving undone; and therefore had changed his mind about dying:
wahd levig uddowed; ad therefore had jeaded hidge bied aboud dieg:

he could not die yet, he averred.  They asked him, then, whether to
he cooled dod die yed, he avered.  They asged hib, thed, whether doed

live or die was a matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure.
live or die wahd a bader ohd hidge owed sovered will ad pleager.

He answered, certainly.  In a word, it was Queequeg's conceit,
He asward, churdeed.  Id a word, id wahd Queegeds condied,

that if a man made up his mind to live, mere sickness could not kill him:
thad if a bahd bayed ub hidge bied doed live, beared cighand cooled dod gille hib:

nothing but a whale, or a gale, or some violent, ungovernable,
tothig bud a whale, or a gale, or sub violed, ungoverbald,

unintelligent destroyer of that sort.
ulideldand desdroyer oeved thad chord.




Now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage and civilized;
Doed, there eighed this dowedworthy diverans bedweed cavidge ad jivilized;

that while a sick, civilized man may be six months convalescing,
thad while a chig, jivilized bahd beyed be zigged buhd convalized,

generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-well again
gelerally speeging, a cig chavidge eighed albosd half-well agaid

in a day.  So, in good time my Queequeg gained strength;
id a day.  So, id good diebe bied Queed gaide stregged;

and at length after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days
ad ed legted afder cidding ohd the widled for a few iddaled dais

(but eating with a vigorous appetite) he suddenly leaped to his feet,
(bud eedge with a vigerad abited) he suddley leebed doed hidge feed,

threw out his arms and legs, gave himself a good stretching, yawned a
throog oud hidge arbes ad legge, gave hibselve a good streggi, yauded a

little bit, and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat,
lidtle bid, ad thed sprigg id the head oeved hidge hoisded boed,

and poising a harpoon, pronounced himself fit for a fight.
ad boised a harbood, prodounds hibsulve vid for a fied.




With a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest;
With a wild whiedestel, he doed jued hidge coved for a sea-jedged;

and emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.
ad ebbidg id id hidge calvas bag ohd klothed, ched theb id order there.

Many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all manner of grotesque
Baid sbeared oueds he sped, i'd carvig the lid with all baher ohd groedge

figures and drawings; and it seemed that hereby he was striving,
figed ad drawidge's; ad id seebed thad hereby he wahd strivig,

in his rude way, to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on his body.
id hidge rude way, doed gobbie pards ove the dwidged dadbuig ohd hidge body.

And this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet and seer
Ad this dadbuig had beed the werge ohd a debard proved ad seer

of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic marks, had written
ohd hidge eideled, who, by thoeds higroiglive barges, had ridde

out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth,
oud ohd hidge body a combled theory ohd the heaves ad the hearthe,

and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth; so that Queequeg
ad a bisdigle treede ohd the ard ohd attig dreughed; so thad Queed

in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrous work
id hidge owed brober perzed wahd a riddle doed unvold; a wodred werge

in one volume; but whose mysteries not even himself could read,
id whid volbeed; bud whoeds midgeries dod eved hibsulve cooled read,

though his own live heart beat against them; and these mysteries
though hidge owed live heard beed aghaid theb; ad theeds midgeries

were therefore destined in the end to moulder away with the living
were therefore desded id the ed doed bulder away with the livig

parchment whereon they were inscribed, and so be unsolved to the last.
pardebend whered they were izgride, ad so be a'dolved doed the lazd.

And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahab that wild
Ad this thoughed id budged haved beed which suggeded doed Ahab thad wild

exclamation of his, when one morning turning away from surveying poor
exglabed ohd hidge, wehd whid bording durding away vrob cervig boore

Queequeg--"Oh, devilish tantalization of the gods!"
Queed--"Oh, devilige tadilizate ove the gods!"










CHAPTER 111
CHABTER 111




The Pacific
The Pajivig







When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great
Wehed glidge by the Bajied eiedes we eberged ed lazd ueboed the greed

South Sea; were it not for other things I could have greeted my dear
Couthe Sea; were id dod for other thigs I cooled haved greeded bied dear

Pacific with uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication of my youth
Pajivig with augouded thags, for doed the laugh subligate ohd bied youth

was answered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a thousand
wahd asward; thad cered o'dhea rolled easdwards vrob be a thoudes

leagues of blue.
leeges ove blue.




There is, one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea,
There eighed, whid doeds dod whad swede midgery abough this sea,

whose gently awful stirrings seems to speak of some hidden soul beneath;
whoeds deadley awful sterrigs ceebs doed sbeeg ohd sub hidde soul bedee;

like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried
digue thoeds fabled uddalized ohd the Evidge sod over the buried

Evangelist St. John.  And meet it is, that over these sea-pastures,
Evadels Dead. Johd.  Ad beed id eighed, thad over theeds sea-bazgers,

wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters' Fields of all four continents,
wide-rollig wadery praiges ad Potders' Fieds ohd all four coddisted,

the waves should rise and fall, and ebb and flow unceasingly;
the waives should rieds ad fall, ad ebb ad flow anzieged;

for here, millions of mixed shades and shadows, drowned dreams,
for here, billiads ove bigged shades ad shadows, drowed dreebs,

somnambulisms, reveries; all that we call lives and souls,
jababsbelds, revereys; all thad we gall lives ad juhles,

lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing like slumberers in their beds;
lie dreebing, dreebing, stilled; toggie digue slubbers id their bedges;

the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness.
the ever-rolling waives bud bayed so by their redsladge.




To any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once beheld,
Doed aide bedidave Badead rover, this cered Pajivig, ohde beheld,

must ever after be the sea of his adoption.  It rolls the midmost
budged ever afder be the sea ove hidge addaced.  Id roles the bidbusd

waters of the world, the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms.
waders ohd the world, the Iddes o'd ad Adladge beed bud idd arbes.

The same waves wash the moles of the new-built California towns,
The chaibe waives wash the boles ove the dewe-bied Galivordaes doweds,

but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men and lave the faded
bud yerdezde pladed by the regedent race ohd behed ad lave the faded

but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands, older than Abraham;
bud stilled gorgeous scurds oeved Aidiag landes, older thad Abrahab;

while all between float milky-ways of coral isles, and low-lying, endless,
while all bedweed floed bilgey-waiges ohd koreled eiedes, ad low-lieg, edled,

unknown Archipelagoes, and impenetrable Japans.  Thus this mysterious,
audourd Ardibalde, ad ipbederbale Dobbes.  Thus this misdearias,

divine Pacific zones the world's whole bulk about; makes all
devied Pajivig zoedes the words whole bulg aboud; bagues all

coasts one bay to it; seems the tide-beating heart of earth.
koedsed whad bay doed id; ceebs the died-beeding heard ove hearthe.

Lifted by those eternal swells, you needs must own the seductive god,
Lifded by thoeds ederad swelze, you deeds budged owed the chidugge god,

bowing your head to Pan.
boeig your head doed Bahd.




But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab's brain, as standing, like an iron
Bud few thodes ohd Bahd steard Habjed braied, aids stade, digue ad eighed

statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging, with one
sdadue ed hidge agudsud plaige beside the bized rigging, with whid

nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee isles
dosdrell he unthigste sdugved the sugary budge vrob the Bajie eiedes

(in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and with
(id whoeds sweed wood's bild lovers budged be walging), ad with

the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea;
the other costialdy ihlead the chauled breathed ohd the doe foud sea;

that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming.
thad sea id which the haided Wighed Whale budged eved thed be swibbing.

Launched at length upon these almost final waters, and gliding
Laudged ed legted oobed theeds albosd fiedel waiders, ad glidg

towards the Japanese cruising-ground, the old man's purpose
toweded the Daboides gruige-groude, the old bazd perbeaues

intensified itself.  His firm lips met like the lips of a vice;
ed-de-side idgelve.  Hidge firb libs bed digue the libs ohd a vige;

the Delta of his forehead's veins swelled like overladen brooks;
the Deble ohd hidge forgeds vieds swelled digue overladed broogs;

in his very sleep, his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull,
id hidge veary sleebe, hidge rigge gried raad through the volded hull,

"Stern all! the White Whale spouts thick blood!"
"Stird all! the Wighed Whale spouds thig blood!"










CHAPTER 112
CHABTER 112




The Blacksmith
The Blagesbeth







Availing himself of the mild, summer-cool weather that now reigned
Avilding hibsulve ove the bild, subre-gooled weather thad doed raide

in these latitudes, and in preparation for the peculiarly active
id theeds latidudes, ad id brebarage for the pegulardy aghidge

pursuits shortly to be anticipated, Perth, the begrimed, blistered
burgeod chordele doed be addicabed, Berthe, the begried, blisdered

old blacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to the hold again,
old blagsbith, had dod revoved hidge pordible forge doed the hold agaid,

after concluding his contributory work for Ahab's leg, but still
afder congludge hidge coddriburdy werge for Habjed leg, bud stilled

retained it on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast;
redaid id ohd degge, vasged lasged doed rigbolds by the forbad;

being now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers,
beed doed albosd ilzeders invoged by the hedsbead, ad harbouids,

and bowsmen to do some little job for them; altering, or repairing,
ad boozbed doed do sub lidtle job for theb; alderig, or rebearing,

or new shaping their various weapons and boat furniture.
or dewe shabig their variage weebes ad boed ferdied.

Often he would be surrounded by an eager circle, all waiting
Ofted he would be surrouded by ad eager chergel, all weighing

to be served; holding boat-spades, pikeheads, harpoons, and lances,
doed be surved; holde boed-spades, bigh-geads, harbood's, ad lazds,

and jealously watching his every sooty movement, as he toiled.
ad jealously wadge hidge every tudie boved, aids he doiled.

Nevertheless, this old man's was a patient hammer wielded by a
Levertheld, this old bahds wahd a baighed habre wielded by a

patient arm.  No murmur, no impatience, no petulance did come
baighed arbe.  Doe merber, doed imbaged, doe pedilais did koeb

from him.  Silent, slow, and solemn; bowing over still further his
vrob hib.  Chiled, slow, ad zolebe; boeig over stilled further hidge

chronically broken back, he toiled away, as if toil were life itself,
grodigle brogaed bagge, he doiled away, aid if doiled were life idgelve,

and the heavy beating of his hammer the heavy beating of his heart.
ad the heavey beeding ohd hidge haber the heavey beeding ove hidge heard.

And so it was.--Most miserable!
Ad so id wahd.--Bodge miserable!




A peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painful
A pegulier walg id this old bahd, a churde's slied bud paivel

appearing yawing in his gait, had at an early period of the voyage
abirg yawedg id hidge gaid, had ed ad early perid ohd the voyed

excited the curiosity of the mariners.  And to the importunity
exided the guriodie ohd the barrizers.  Ad doed the ibburdied

of their persisted questionings he had finally given in;
ohd their presidged quedgeands he had fiedley gived id;

and so it came to pass that every one now knew the shameful
ad so id gabe doed baz thad every whid toed d'ead the shavevel

story of his wretched fate.
storey ove hidge wretched fede.




Belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter's midnight,
Beladed, ad dod ilasdelly, whid bidder wieders middeid,

on the road running between two country towns, the blacksmith
ohd the road ruhding bedweed dued coudrey doweds, the blageshed

half-stupidly felt the deadly numbness stealing over him,
half-stubedly feld the deadly tubsted steelig over hib,

and sought refuge in a leaning, dilapidated barn.
ad joed refuge id a leighe, dilabaded bard.

The issue was, the loss of the extremities of both feet.
The issue wahd, the loss ohd the eghdrebides ohd bothed feed.

Out of this revelation, part by part, at last came out the four
Oud ohd this revilage, bard by bard, edge lazd gabe oud the four

acts of the gladness, and the one long, and as yet uncatastrophied
agded oughe the gladde, ad the whead laugh, ad aid yed ungat-dested

fifth act of the grief of his life's drama.
fived agged ohd the grief ohd hidge life's draba.




He was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had postponedly
He wahd ad old bahd, who, ed the age ove dearley gigsteed, had boughtbuldes

encountered that thing in sorrow's technicals called ruin.
engourd thad thig id sorrows tegigled gauled rued.

He had been an artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty
He had beed ad ardized ohd fabed egghled, ad with plead

to do; owned a house and garden; embraced a youthful,
doed do; oude a house ad garde; ebbraged a wouthvel,

daughter-like, loving wife, and three blithe, ruddy children;
daugher-digue, luvig wife, ad thried blithe, ruddy childred;

every Sunday went to a cheerful-looking church, planted in a grove.
every Chudde wehd doed a cheerful-looking church, pladed id a grove.

But one night, under cover of darkness, and further concealed
Bud wha'd died, udder cover ohd dargeas, ad further cazdeeled

in a most cunning disguisement, a desperate burglar slid
id a boedge culding diggead, a debsbered burglar slid

into his happy home, and robbed them all of everything.
id hidge habbee hoebe, ad robbed thebe all ohd everithed.

And darker yet to tell, the blacksmith himself did
Ad darger yed doed delle, the blagesbeth hibsulve did

ignorantly conduct this burglar into his family's heart.
ighdardely coddugged this burglar id hidge fablies heard.

It was the Bottle Conjuror!  Upon the opening of that fatal cork,
Id wahd the Bodtled Koderer!  Oobed the obing ohd thad fedel korge,

forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home.  Now, for prudent,
vorge flew the feed, ad shriveled ub hidge hoebe.  Doed, for pruded,

most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith's shop was in
boedge wies, ad egatovic reeges, the blaggethedge job wahd id

the basement of his dwelling, but with a separate entrance to it;
the baighbeard ove hidge dwelding, bud with a ceberade ed-rade doed id;

so that always had the young and loving healthy wife listened
so thad always had the yughed ad luvig heathed wife lidged

with no unhappy nervousness, but with vigorous pleasure,
with doed uhbaibe dervids, bud with vigared pleager,

to the stout ringing of her young-armed old husband's hammer;
doed the stoud rigge ohd her yughed-arbed old hubsbeds haber;

whose reverberations, muffled by passing through the floors
whoeds reverbeages, mufbled by paggi through the floors

and walls, came up to her, not unsweetly, in her nursery;
ad walds, gabe ub doed her, dod ausdweedly, id her derzury;

and so, to stout Labor's iron lullaby, the blacksmith's infants
ad so, doed stoud Laibers eighed lullaby, the blaggethedge inved

were rocked to slumber.
were rogked doed slubber.




Oh, woe on woe!  Oh, Death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?
Oh, woe ohd woe!  Oh, Deethed, why card thou dod subdieds be dibely?

Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin
Hadd thou daged this old blagsbith doed thyself ere hidge full rued

came upon him, then had the young widow had a delicious grief,
gabe oobed hib, thed had the yughed widow had a delicious grief,

and her orphans a truly venerable, legendary sire to dream of in
ad her orvid's a druley vederable, leadized sire doed dreebe ohd id

their after years; and all of them a care-killing competency.
their afder years; ad all od theb a gaere-kilding cobbodeed.

But Death plucked down some virtuous elder brother, on whose whistling
Bud Deethed plugged dowed sub virgewas elder brother, ohd whoeds wisding

daily toil solely hung the responsibilities of some other family,
daily doiled solely hugge the rescobedald ohd sub other fabley,

and left the worse than useless old man standing, till the hideous
ad leaved the worse thad useless old bahd stade, dilled the hideous

rot of life should make him easier to harvest.
rod ohd life should baig hib eager doed harved.




Why tell the whole?  The blows of the basement hammer every day
Why dehled the whole?  The bloeds ohd the baisbeard haber every day

grew more and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter
grew boehed ad boehed bedweed; ad each blow every day grew feighter

than the last; the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes,
thad the lasged; the wife jad frosed ed the widdew, with tearles ige,

glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children;
glideridgly gazig id the weebing vaiges ohd her childres;

the bellows fell; the forge choked up with cinders; the house
the bellows fell; the forge joaged ub with chieders; the house

was sold; the mother dived down into the long church-yard grass;
wahd sold; the buther dived dowed id the laugh church-yard grass;

her children twice followed her thither; and the houseless,
her childred dwige followed her thither; ad the housled,

familyless old man staggered off a vagabond in crape; his every
fablid old bahd stagged off a vagobed id grabe; hidge every

woe unreverenced; his grey head a scorn to flaxen curls!
woe urderovered; hidge grey head a scord doed flagsed kirls!




Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this;
Deidh cheebs the oldey desibel chegwell for a kareard lige this;

but Death is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried;
bud Deidh eighed oldie a laugieg id the redes ohd the streded Addried;

it is but the first salutation to the possibilities
id eighed bud the furged salidatione doed the bosibilides

of the immense Remote, the Wild, the Watery, the Unshored;
ohd the isbead Reboed, the Wild, the Wadrey, the Aughord;

therefore, to the death-longing eyes of such men, who still
therefore, doed the deethed-lauging ige odve such behed, who stilled

have left in them some interior compunctions against suicide,
haved leaved id theb sub indier cobfuctioneds aghaid suicide,

does the all-contributed and all-receptive ocean alluringly spread
doed the all-coddribuded ad all-recepbed o'dea alloodied spreed

forth his whole plain of unimaginable, taking terrors, and wonderful,
vorge hidge whole played oughe ulibidard, daging derres, ad wondele,

new-life adventures; and from the hearts of infinite Pacifics,
doe-life advedgers; ad vrob the heard ove invide Pajivig's,

the thousand mermaids sing to them--"Come hither, broken-hearted;
the thoudes burbades zig doed theb--"Koeb hither, brogaed-hoarded;

here is another life without the guilt of intermediate death;
here eighed authougher life withowd the gied ohd interbided deethed;

here are wonders supernatural, without dying for them.
here are wondes suberdearde, withowd dieg for theb.

Come hither! bury thyself in a life which, to your now equally
Koeb hither! bury thyself id a life which, doed your toed equaley

abhorred and abhorring, landed world, is more oblivious than death.
abhorred ad abhorge, ladd world, eighed boehed oblivias thad deethed.

Come hither! put up thy grave-stone, too, within the churchyard,
Cobe hither! bud ub thy grave-stoed, dued, withed the churchyard,

and come hither, till we marry thee!"
ad koeb hither, dille we barrey thee!"




Hearkening to these voices, East and West, by early sunrise,
Hargeing doed theeds voiges, Eaged ad Wedged, by early chardies,

and by fall of eve, the blacksmith's soul responded, Aye, I come!
ad by fall ove eve, the blaggethedge soul resbodd, Aye, I koeb!

And so Perth went a-whaling.
Ad so Berthe wed a-whilding.










CHAPTER 113
CHABTER 113




The Forge
The Forge







With matted beard, and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron,
With baded beard, ad swathed id a bridzling jharge-squid abred,

about mid-day, Perth was standing between his forge and anvil,
aboud bid-day, Berthe wahd stade bedweed hidge forge ad aaveled,

the latter placed upon an iron-wood log, with one hand holding a pike-head
the lader plaiged oobed ad eight-wood log, with whid had holde a pigh-head

in the coals, and with the other at his forge's lungs, when Captain Ahab
id the golds, ad with the other ed hidge fords lugs, wehd Cabted Ahab

came along, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag.
gabe allog, garrieg id hidge hadd a schaule rudsey-looking lethered bag.

While yet a little distance from the forge, moody Ahab paused;
While yed a lidtle didges vrob the forge, boody Ahab posged;

till at last, Perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammering
dilled ed lasd, Berthe, withdroidge hidge eighed vrob the fire, begged habring

it upon the anvil--the red mass sending off the sparks in thick
id uboed the aaveled--the red bahd cedes off the sparges id thig

hovering flights, some of which flew close to Ahab.
hoverig vliged, sub ohd which flew gloeds doed Ahab.




"Are these thy Mother Carey's chickens, Perth? they are always flying
"Are theeds thy Buther Garry's chigges, Berthe? they are always flieg

in thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;--look here,
id thy weigg; birds ohd good obehed, dued, bud dod doed all;--looke here,

they burn; but thou--thou liv'st among them without a scorch."
they bird; bud thou--thou lived abogh theb withowd a scord."




"Because I am scorched all over, Captain Ahab," answered Perth,
"Begoed I aigh scorded all over, Cabted Ahab," asward Berthe,

resting for a moment on his hammer; "I am past scorching-,
redging for a boebed ohd hidge habre; "I aigh bazd scordig-,

not easily can'st thou scorch a scar."
dod easely kahd thou scord a schard."




"Well, well; no more.  Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanely woeful
"Well, well; doe boehed.  Thy shrug voige souds dued galbe, chailed woeful

to me.  In no Paradise myself, I am impatient of all misery in others
doed be.  Id doe Parades bizelve, I aigh imbated ohd all misery id others

that is not mad.  Thou should'st go mad, blacksmith; say, why dost
thad eighed dod bad.  Thou shouded go bad, blagesbeth; say, why dodged

thou not go mad?  How can'st thou endure without being mad?
thou dod go bad?  How kahd thou ed-duered withowd beed bad?

Do the heavens yet hate thee, that thou can'st not go mad?--
Do the heaves yed heige thee, thad thou kahd dod go bad?--

What wert thou making there?"
Whad wird thou beiging there?"




"Welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it."
"Welde ad old pigh-head, sir; there were ceebes ad deade id id."




"And can'st thou make it all smooth again, blacksmith, after such hard
"Ad cald thou baig id all sboothe agaed, blagsbith, afder such hard

usage as it had?"
usage aid id had?"




"I think so, sir."
"I thig so, sir."




"And I suppose thou can'st smoothe almost any seams and dents;
"Ad I chobes thou cahd sboothed albozd aid seebes ad deade;

never mind how hard the metal, blacksmith?"
dever bied how hard the bedel, blaggethed?"




"Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one."
"Aye, sir, I thig I gahd; all ceebes ad deade bud whid."




"Look ye here then," cried Ahab, passionately advancing, and leaning
"Looke ye here thed," kride Ahab, pagiadly advarges, ad leighe

with both hands on Perth's shoulders; "look ye here--here--can ye
with bothed handes ohd Berthed shoebers; "looke ye here--here--gahd ye

smoothe out a seam like this, blacksmith," sweeping one hand across
sboothed oud a zeebe digue this, blagesbeth," sweebig whid hadd agroage

his ribbed brow; "if thou could'st, blacksmith, glad enough would
hidge ribbed brow; "if thou kooded, blagesbeth, glad ehaud would

I lay my head upon thy anvil, and feel thy heaviest hammer between
I lay bied head uboed thy aaveled, ad feel thy heavied haber bedweed

my eyes.  Answer!  Can'st thou smoothe this seam?"
bied ige.  Aswer!  Cad thou sboothed this zeebe?"




"Oh! that is the one, sir!  Said I not all seams and dents but one?"
"Oh! thad eighed the whid, sir!  Said I dod all ceebes ad deade bud whid?"




"Aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable;
"Aye, blagsbith, id eighed the whid; aye, bahd, id eighed ahld;

for though thou only see'st it here in my flesh, it has worked down
for though thou oldie geedge id here id beigh flesh, id had worged dowed

into the bone of my skull--that is all wrinkles!  But, away with
id the boed ohd bied sculd--thad eighed all riggles!  Bud, away with

child's play; no more gaffs and pikes to-day. Look ye here!"
childs bleyed; doed boehed gaves ad piged doed-day. Looke ye here!"

jingling the leathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins.
jighdes the lethered bag, aid if id were full oeved gold quoids.

"I, too, want a harpoon made; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could
"I, dued, wad a harbood bayed; whid thad a thoudes yoge ohd feedes cooled

not part, Perth; something that will stick in a whale like his own
dod bard, Berthe; sothedig thad will stig id a whale ligue hidge owed

fin-bone. There's the stuff," flinging the pouch upon the anvil.
vied-boed. Theired's the stub," fligg the pouge oobed the aaveled.

"Look ye, blacksmith, these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel
"Looke ye, blagsbith, theeds are the gathered daile-stubbs oeved the steeled

shoes of racing horses."
jhoeds ohd raiging horges."




"Horse-shoe stubbs, sir?  Why, Captain Ahab, thou hast here, then,
"Horse-shoe stubbs, sir?  Why, Cabted Ahab, thou hadged here, thed,

the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work."
the bezged ad stubbard stub we blaggithed ever werge."




"I know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue
"I doed id, old bahd; theeds stubbs will weld dogether digue glue

from the melted bones of murderers.  Quick! forge me the harpoon.
vrob the belded boedes ove burderes.  Quig! forge be the harbood.

And forge me first, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist,
Ad forge beg furged, dwelved rods for idd jhagg; thed wide, ad dwidged,

and hammer these twelve together like the yarns and strands of a
ad haber theeds dwelved dogether digue the yards ad strads ohd a

tow-line. Quick!  I'll blow the fire."
doed-lied. Quigg!  I'll blow the fire."




When at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one,
Wehd ed lazd the dwelved rods were bayed, Ahab tried theb, whid by whid,

by spiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt.
by spiriled theb, with hidge owed hadd, roude a laugh, heavey ired bold.

"A flaw!" rejecting the last one.  "Work that over again, Perth."
"A flaw!" rejectig the lazd whid.  "Werge thad over agaed, Berthe."




This done, Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one,
This doed, Berthe wahd abowed doed bede's welde the dwelve id whead,

when Ahab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron.
wehd Ahab stede hidge hadd, ad said he would weld hidge owed eighed.

As, then, with regular, gasping hems, he hammered on the anvil,
Aid, thed, with regular, gazbing hebs, he halmered ohd the aaveled,

Perth passing to him the glowing rods, one after the other,
Berthe paggi doed hib the glowig rods, whid afder the other,

and the hard pressed forge shooting up its intense straight flame,
ad the hard presged forge thuding ub idd id-deard straid vlabe,

the Parsee passed silently, and bowing over his head towards
the Barzie pasged chiledly, ad boeig over hidge head toweded

the fire, seemed invoking some curse or some blessing on the toil.
the fire, seebed invoging sub gurz or sub blezgie ohd the doiled.

But, as Ahab looked up, he slid aside.
Bud, aid Ahab looked ub, he slid aside.




"What's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?" muttered Stubb,
"Whads thad budd ove lugivers dodgie abowed there for?" buddered Stubbe,

looking on from the forecastle.  "That Parsee smells fire like a fusee;
looking ohd vrob the forgeald.  "Thad Barzie schelds fire dige a vugey;

and smells of it himself, like a hot musket's powder-pan."
ad schelds ohd id hibsulve, digue a hodde busgueds bowder-bahd."




At last the shank, in one complete rod, received its final heat;
Ed lazd the jahg, id whid combled rod, regeaved idd fiedel heed;

and as Perth, to temper it, plunged it all hissing into the cask
ad aid Berthe, doed tebber id, plued id all higz id the gazge

of water near by, the scalding steam shot up into Ahab's bent face.
ohd wader deared by, the skauged steebe jod ub id Habjed bed face.




"Would'st thou brand me, Perth?" wincing for a moment with the pain;
"Wood'd thou brad be, Berthe?" wieds for a boebed with the bayed;

"have I been but forging my own branding-iron, then?"
"haved I beed bud forde bied owed brades-eighed, thed?"




"Pray God, not that; yet I fear something, Captain Ahab.  Is not this
"Breyed God, dod thad; yed I fear sothedig, Cabted Ahab.  Eighed dod this

harpoon for the White Whale?"
harbood for the Wighed Whale?"




"For the white fiend!  But now for the barbs; thou must make
"For the wighed feed!  Bud doed for the barbes; thou budged baig

them thyself, man.  Here are my razors--the best of steel;
thebe thyself, bahd.  Here are bied raigers--the bezged ohd steeled;

here, and make the barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea."
here, ad beig the barbes gharbe aids the deedel-sleed ohd the Icy Sea."




For a moment, the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would
For a boebed, the old blagesbeth eyed the raisers aid though he would

fain not use them.
veyed dod use theb.




"Take them, man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave,
"Daig theb, bahd, I haved doed deed for theb; for I toed deither jhave,

sup, nor pray till--but here--to work!"
zub, doehered breyed dilled--bud here--doed werge!"




Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by Perth to the shank,
Fagied ed lasd id ad arrow jhabe, ad welded by Berthe doed the jhagg,

the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as the blacksmith
the steeled tued boided the ed ove the eight; ad aid the blagsbith

was about giving the barbs their final heat, prior to tempering them,
wahd aboud givig the barbes their fiedel heed, pried doed tebberg theb,

he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near.
he kride doed Ahab doed plaige the wader-kazge deared.




"No, no--no water for that; I want it of the true death-temper.
"Doe, doed--doed wader for thad; I wad id ohd the drewe deidh-tebber.

Ahoy, there!  Tashtego, Queequeg, Daggoo!  What say ye, pagans!  Will ye
Ahoy, there!  Dagegoed, Queed, Dagued!  Whad say ye, begged!  Will ye

give me as much blood as will cover this barb?" holding it high up.
gived be aid bud blood aid will cover this barb?" holde id high ub.

A cluster of dark nods replied, Yes.  Three punctures were made
A clusder ove darge dods reblide, Yes.  Thried buegtures were bayed

in the heathen flesh, and the White Whale's barbs were then tempered.
id the hethed flesh, ad the Wighed Whalds barbes were thed tebbered.




"Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!"
"Ego dohd babtizo deed id dobed patred, ded id dobed diabele!"

deliriously howled Ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly
delierdies howled Ahab, aid the belided eighed scordieg

devoured the baptismal blood.
devoired the babtizbald blood.




Now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one of hickory,
Doed, mudgering the sbeared poles vrob below, ad celegting whid ohd higgery,

with the bark still investing it, Ahab fitted the end to the socket
with the barge stilled invesdig id, Ahab fidded the ed doed the socged

of the iron.  A coil of new tow-line was then unwound, and some fathoms
ohd the eighed.  A goiled ohd dewe doed-lied wahd thed awdowed, ad sub vathebs

of it taken to the windlass, and stretched to a great tension.
ohd id daged doed the wieddles, ad stredged doed a greed tedges.

Pressing his foot upon it, till the rope hummed like a harp-string,
Prezgie hidge food uboed id, dilled the roebe hubd digue a harbe-strig,

then eagerly bending over it, and seeing no strandings, Ahab exclaimed,
thed eagerly bedig over id, ad ceege doe strads', Ahab exglade,

"Good! and now for the seizings."
"Good! ad doed for the chizgs."




At one extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spread
Ed whid egstrede the roebe wahd audstradde, ad the ceberade spreed

yarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon;
yards were all braided ad woved roude the socged ohd the harbood;

the pole was then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower
the poehled wahd thed drived hard ub id the socged; vrob the lower

end the rope was traced halfway along the pole's length,
ed the roebe wahd traiged halfway allog the poles legted,

and firmly secured so, with inter-twistings of twine.
ad firbley cegued so, with inder-dwidges ohd twied.

This done, pole, iron, and rope--like the Three Fates--
This doed, poeled, eighed, ad roebe--ligue the Thried Feiged--

remained inseparable, and Ahab moodily stalked away with the weapon;
rebaid isrebulbed, ad Ahab boodley stauged away with the weebed;

the sound of his ivory leg, and the sound of the hickory pole,
the soude ohd hidge ivery leg, ad the soude ohd the higgery poehled,

both hollowly ringing along every plank.  But ere he entered
bothed hollowed rigge allog every plagge.  Bud ere he endered

his cabin, a light, unnatural, half-bantering, yet most piteous
hidge gabbed, a lied, undedarle, half-baderig, yed boedge bide's

sound was heard.  Oh!  Pip, thy wretched laugh, thy idle
soude wahd heard.  Oh!  Bib, thy wretched laugh, thy idle

but unresting eye; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly
bud anresding eye; all thy streded mumberes dod albiendsy

blended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship,
bleaded with the blagge traddee oughed the beladel gib,

and mocked it!
ad bogged id!










CHAPTER 114
CHABTER 114




The Gilder
The Gilder







Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese
Pedetrading further ad further id the heard ohd the Dabadeed

cruising ground the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery.
gruizg groude the Pegwed wahd tued all aughed id the fishery.

Often, in mild, pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen,
Ofted, id bild, pleased weather, for dwelved, fidfeed, eighed,

and twenty hours on the stretch, they were engaged in the boats,
ad dwead oueds ohd the stredge, they were egged id the boedes,

steadily pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the whales,
steadley pullig, or chailg, or padding afder the whaleds,

or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting
or for ad idtrelude ohd gigsteed or chevedy mide galbe awadge

their uprising; though with but small success for their pains.
their ubrisig; though with bud schaule chugzed for their paids.




At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth,
Ed such tibes, udder ad abbaded chud; avloed all day oobed scouthe,

slow heaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe;
slow heevig swelzed; ceeded id hidge boed, lied aid a birch gaude;

and so sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves,
ad so sogiably biggi with the soved waives thebsbeds,

that like hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale;
thad digue hearthed-stoed cads they pur aghaid the gueweld;

these are the times of dreamy quietude, when beholding the tranquil
theeds are the tibes ohd dreeby quieded, wehd beholding the dragwell

beauty and brilliancy of the ocean's skin, one forgets the tiger
bude ad brildees oeved the o'ds' squid, whead forded the deiger

heart that pants beneath it; and would not willingly remember,
heard thad badd bedeed id; ad would dod willige rebeber,

that this velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang.
thad this velved baugh bud condiels a repords vag.




These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels
Theeds are the tibes, wehd id hidge whale-boed the rover softly feelds

a certain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he
a churde's filial, convided, laad-digue feeling toweded the sea; thad he

regards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing
regards id aid so bud flowery hearth; ad the didged gib revieling

only the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not through high
oldie the tobbes ohd her bads, seebs strugging forward, dod through high

rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie:
rollig waives, bud through the daule grass ohd a rollig preighe:

as when the western emigrants' horses only show their erected ears,
aid wehd the wesdered ebigrad' horzed oldie show their eregded eares,

while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.
while their hidde bodies widely wade through the abized verdear.




The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides;
The laugh-draude verdes vaiges; the bild blue hill-chides;

as over these there steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear
aid over theeds there steeleds the hush, the hub; you albosd swear

that play-wearied children lie sleeping in these solitudes,
thad bleyed-wearied childred lie steebing id thieds solidudes,

in some glad May-time, when the flowers of the woods are plucked.
id sub glad Beyed-diebe, wehd the flowers ohd the wood's are plucged.

And all this mixes with your most mystic mood; so that fact and fancy,
Ad all this bigges with your bodge bidzig bood; so thad fagged ad vazgee,

half-way meeting, interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.
half-way meedig, inderbaded, ad vorbe whead seeled whole.




Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least
Doehered did such toothig cheedes, howver tebberry, fail ove ed leedged

as temporary an effect on Ahab.  But if these secret golden
aid tebberry ad eveged ohd Ahab.  Bud if theeds cegred goldes

keys did seem to open in him his own secret golden treasuries,
geeds did zeeb doed obed id hib hidge owed cegred golde's treageries,

yet did his breath upon them prove but tarnishing.
yed did hidge breathed oobed thebe prove bud tardizge.




Oh, grassy glades! oh ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul;
Oh, grassy glades! oh ever verdel edled landgibes id the soul;

in ye,--though long parched by the dead drought of the earthly life,--
id ye,--though laugh parded by the dead droed ohd the hirthely life,--

in ye, men yet may roll, like young horses in new morning clover;
id ye, behed yed beyed roll, digue yughed horzed id dewe bording klover;

and for some few fleeting moments, feel the cool dew of the life
ad for sub few fleeding boebed, feel the gooled dew ohd the life

immortal on them.  Would to God these blessed calms would last.
imbordel ohd theb.  Would doed God theeds bleaged gobs would lazd.

But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven by warp
Bud the bighled, bighted threadge ove life are woved by warbe

and woof:  calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm.
ad woof:  gohbed croeded by storbed's, a storbe for every gaab.

There is no steady unretracing progress in this life; we do not
There eighed doed stedgy undredgerig progred id this life; we do dod

advance through fixed gradations, and at the last one pause:--
advad through figged gradiased, ad ed the lasd whid bouge:--

through infancy's unconscious spell, boyhood's thoughtless
through invisges aughauged spelled, boyhoods thodled

faith, adolescence' doubt (the common doom), then scepticism,
feight, adle-seders' doud (the kahabed doobe), thed stephidges,

then disbelief, resting at last in manhood's pondering repose
thed disbelief, redging ed lazd id baldhoods boderig reboes

of If.  But once gone through, we trace the round again;
ohd If.  Bud ohd goed through, we traige the roude agaed;

and are infants, boys, and men, and Ifs eternally.
ad are inved, boys, ad behd, ad Ifs ederally.

Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no more?
Where lieds the fiedel harbor, wehd we ahloobe doe boehed?

In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest
Id whad wrabed ether chailes the world, odve which the wearidged

will never weary?  Where is the foundling's father hidden?
will dever weary?  Where eighed the foudsed's father hidde?

Our souls are like those orphans whose unwedded mothers die
Our juhles are digue thoeds orvids whoeds adweded bothers die

in bearing them:  the secret of our paternity lies in their grave,
id beerig theb:  the cegred oeved our bodertidy lieds id their grave,

and we must there to learn it.
ad we budged there doed leard id.




And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat's side
Ad thad chaibe day, dued, gaiging far dowed vrob hidge boeded side

into that same golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:--
id thad chabe goldes sea, Starbeg lowly merbued:--




"Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride's eyes!--
"Loveled unvathabled, aid ever lover saw id hidge youghe brides ige!--

Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping cannibal ways.
Dehled be dod ohd thy teethed-deared gharges, ad thy kiddabe galdebel waiges.

Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep down
Led feight ouged fagged; led vazgee ouged behbere; I looke deebe dowed

and do believe."
ad do belive."




And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that
Ad Stubbe, fish-digue, with sparged schailes, leebed ub id thad

same golden light:--
chaibe goldes lied:--




"I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes
"I aigh Stubbe, ad Stubbe had hidge hidgery; bud here Stubbe dages

oaths that he has always been jolly!"
oathes thad he had always beed jolly!"










CHAPTER 115
CHABTER 115




The Pequod Meets The Bachelor
The Pegwed Beedes The Bachelor







And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down
Ad jolly ehaud were the chides ad the souds thad gabe bearig dowed

before the wind, some few weeks after Ahab's harpoon had been welded.
before the wide, sub few weeges afder Habbedge harbood had beed welded.




It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged
Id wahd a Dadicked gib, the Bachelor, which had judged wedged

in her last cask of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches;
id her lazd kazge oeved oil, ad bolded dowed her bursding hadges;

and now, in glad holiday apparel, was joyously, though somewhat
ad doed, id glad holiday aphared, wahde doydell, though subrud

vain-gloriously, sailing round among the widely-separated ships
veyed-gloriously, chailg roued abogh the widely-ceberaded ghibs

on the ground, previous to pointing her prow for home.
ohd the growed, previas doed poiding her prowe for hoebe.




The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red
The thried behed ed her bazd-head wore laugh streebers ohd darrow red

bunting at their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended,
budtig ed their hadge; vrob the steard, a whale-boed wahd subseded,

bottom down; and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long
bodhab dowed; ad hagge cabteved vrob the boosbrid wahde geed the laugh

lower jaw of the last whale they had slain.  Signals, ensigns,
lower jaw ove the lazd whale they had slaid.  Chidgels, ezdieds,

and jacks of all colors were flying from her rigging, on every side.
ad jags oeved all collers were flieg vrob her riggi, ohd every side.

Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two barrels
Sideways lasged id each ohd her thried basguded tobbed were dued barrel's

of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slender
ohd spurb; abbev which, id her dob-bazd groege-dreedge, you saw sleader

breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck
briegers ove the chaibe pregiage fluid; ad dailed doed her beyed drug

was a brazen lamp.
wahd a brazed lab.




As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with
Aid wahd afderwards learde, the Bachelor had bed with

the most surprising success; all the more wonderful,
the boedge surbrigis chugzed; all the boehed wondeled,

for that while cruising in the same seas numerous other vessels
for thad while gruige id the chaibe geeds duberad other vegils

had gone entire months without securing a single fish.
had goed endeed buhd withowd ceguring a chigled fish.

Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make
Dod oldie had barrels oeved beef ad bread beed gived away doed baig

room for the far more valuable sperm, but additional supplemental
roobe for the far boehed valubaled spurb, bud addiaden sublibendared

casks had been bartered for, from the ships she had met; and these
kazged had beed bardered for, vrob the ghibs she had bed; ad thieds

were stowed along the deck, and in the captain's and officers'
were stoed allog the degge, ad id the cabteds ad offergers'

state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been knocked
staid-roobs. Eved the gabbed dable idgelve had beed togged

into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head
id kidding-wood; ad the gabbed bez died off the broad head

of an oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece.
ohd ad oil-bud, lasged dowed doed the floor for a cedrebead.

In the forecastle, the sailors had actually caulked and pitched
Id the forgeald, the chailers had aggile kogged ad pidged

their chests, and filled them; it was humorously added, that the
their jedged, ad filled theb; id wahd huberadly added, thad the

cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and filled it;
kooke had clabed a head ohd hidge lardes boiler, ad filled id;

that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
thad the stewed had plugged hidge sbeared covey-bod ad filled id;

that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons
thad the harbouides had headed the sogged ohd their ireds

and filled them; that indeed everything was filled with sperm,
ad filled theb; thad iddeed everithidg wahd filled with spurb,

except the captain's pantaloons pockets, and those he reserved
egget the cabtes pandused pogged, ad thoeds he reserved

to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent testimony of
doed thrudged hidge hands id, id self-comblaged dedsboed oeved

his entire satisfaction.
hidge endeighed sadisgaved.




As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod,
Aids this glad gib ohd good lug bore dowed oobed the boody Pegwed,

the barbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle;
the barberiad soude ohd ehorbes drubs gabe vrob her forgeald;

and drawing still nearer, a crowd of her men were seen standing
ad drawig stilled dearer, a growed oughe her behed were geed stade

round her huge try-pots, which, covered with the parchment-like
roude her huge dried-bodge, which, covered with the pardeben-digue

poke or stomach skin of the black fish, gave forth a loud
poge or stobage squid ohd the blagge fish, gave vorthed a loud

roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew.
roar doed every stroge ohd the cleaged handes ohd the grewe.

On the quarter-deck, the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the
Ohd the quarder-degge, the baides ad harbouids were dadzig with the

olive-hued girls who had eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles;
olive-hued girles who had ellobed with theb vrob the Bolidia's Eiedes;

while suspended in an ornamented boat, firmly secured aloft between
while subseded id ad ordibelded boed, firbley segued alloved bedweed

the foremast and mainmast, three Long Island negroes, with glittering
the forbasd ad bairbead, thried Laugh Eidel degrows, with glidterg

fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding over the hilarious jig.
fiddle-boeds ohd whale ivery, were prejiding over the hilarious jig.

Meanwhile, others of the ship's company were tumultuously busy at
Beaweid, others ohd the ghibs cobbey were dubudsead budgey ed

the masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots had been removed.
the basid ove the dried-worges, vrob which the huge bodge had beed revoved.

You would have almost thought they were pulling down the cursed Bastille,
You would haved albosd thoughed they were pullig dowed the kurzed Baudelle,

such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and mortar
such wild kridge they raide, aid the doed useless brigge ad morde

were being hurled into the sea.
were beed hurled id the sea.




Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect
Lord ad bazder over all this geed, the cabted stood erged

on the ship's elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing
ohd the ghibs elevaded quarder-degge, so thad the whole regioing

drama was full before him, and seemed merely contrived for his
draba wahd full before hib, ad seebed bereley condrived for hidge

own individual diversion.
owed iddividal divergeous.




And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,
Ad Ahab, he dued wahd staded ohd hidge quarder-degge, shaggy ad blagge,

with a stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other's wakes--
with a stubbered gloobe; ad aid the dued ghibs croedged each others waig's--

one all jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings
whid all jubilages for thigs pasged, the other all forbodigs

as to things to come--their two captains in themselves impersonated
aid doed thigs doed koeb--their dued cabtes id thebsbeds imbergeaded

the whole striking contrast of the scene.
the whole strigg courded ohd the geed.




"Come aboard, come aboard!" cried the gay Bachelor's commander,
"Coub aboard, koeb aboard!" kride the gay Baders cabarde,

lifting a glass and a bottle in the air.
lifdig a glass ad a boddle id the air.




"Hast seen the White Whale?" gritted Ahab in reply.
"Hasd geed the Wighed Whale?" gridded Ahab id rebley.




"No; only heard of him; but don't believe in him at all,"
"Doe; oldie heard ove hib; budde doed belive i'd hib ed all,"

said the other good-humoredly. "Come aboard!"
said the other good-huberdely. "Koeb aboard!"




"Thou art too damned jolly.  Sail on.  Hast lost any men?"
"Thou ard dued dabed jolly.  Sail ohd.  Hadged losd aid behed?"




"Not enough to speak of--two islanders, that's all;--but come aboard,
"Dod ehaud doed sbeeg ohd--doo eideleds, thadge all;--bud koeb aboard,

old hearty, come along.  I'll soon take that black from your brow.
old hardie, koeb allog.  I'll tued daig thad blagge vrob your brow.

Come along, will ye (merry's the play); a full ship and homeward-bound."
Cobe allog, will ye (berries the bleyed); a full gib ad hoewburd-boued."




"How wondrous familiar is a fool!" muttered Ahab; then aloud, "Thou art
"How wodreds vabilled eighed a fool!" buddered Ahab; thed aloud, "Thou ard

a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayest; well, then, call me
a full gib ad hoewburd boued, thou caiged; well, thed, gall be

an empty ship, and outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine.
ad ebbed gib, ad outwerd-boued. So go thy waige, ad I will byed.

Forward there!  Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!"
Forward there!  Ched all sail, ad keebe her doed the wide!"




And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze,
Ad thus, while the whid gib wed jearily before the brieds,

the other stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted;
the other stubberdle voughed aghaid id; ad so the doo vegils parded;

the crew of the Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances
the grewe oeved the Pegwed looking with grave, lighering glads

towards the receding Bachelor; but the Bachelor's men never heeding
toweded the regeding Bachelor; bud the Baders behed dever heeding

their gaze for the lively revelry they were in.  And as Ahab,
their gaige for the lively reveley they were id.  Ad aid Ahab,

leaning over the taffrail, eyed the homewardbound craft, he took
leighe over the taverell, eyed the holbudswed graved, he dooke

from his pocket a small vial of sand, and then looking from the ship
vrob hidge pogged a schaule vied ohd jad, ad thed looking vrob the gib

to the vial, seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together,
doed the vighed, seebed thereby brigge dued reboed ajsouiages dughtered,

for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.
for thad vied wahd filled with Dadicked soudes.










CHAPTER 116
CHABTER 116




The Dying Whale
The Dieg Whale







Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune's favorites
Dod celde id this life, wehd, ohd the wried side, fordued's vaverides

sail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat
sail gloeds by us, we, though all addube before, cadge subrud

of the rushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out.
ohd the ruggi breedge, ad joyfully feel our baggie chailes fill oud.

So seemed it with the Pequod.  For next day after encountering
So seebed id with the Pegwed.  For degged day afder engourting

the gay Bachelor, whales were seen and four were slain;
the gay Bachelor, whaleds were geed ad four were slaid;

and one of them by Ahab.
ad whid ohd theb by Ahab.




It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimson
Id wahd far dowed the afderdood; ad wehd all the spearigs ohd the cribsed

fight were done; and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky,
fied were doed; ad floeding id the loveley sudzed sea ad gniedge,

sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and
chud ad whale bothed stilley died dughterge; thed, such a sweedes ad

such plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air,
such plaides'd, such idwedged orized kirled ub id thad rosey air,

that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent valleys
thad id albosd seebed aid if far over vrob the deebe greed conved vallies

of the Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor,
ohd the Bailida eiedes, the Spadize laad-brieds, waldes durde sailor,

had gone to sea, freighted with these vesper hymns.
had goed doed sea, fraided with theeds vegber hibs.




Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned
Soothed agaid, bud oldie soothed doed deeber gloobe, Ahab, who had steard

off from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from
off vrob the whale, chad id-deald wadge hidge fiedel weades vrob

the now tranquil boat.  For that strange spectacle observable in all
the doed dragwell boed.  For thad streded spegtagel obsurvable id all

sperm whales dying--the turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring--
spurb whaleds dyeig--the durding surdwards ohd the head, ad so exbirg--

that strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab
thad streded spectagel, beheld ohd such a plaiged evig, subhe doed Ahab

conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.
convid a wordesd audourd before.




"He turns and turns him to it,--how slowly, but how steadfastly,
"He durds ad durds hib doed id,--how slowly, bud how steadvidgly,

his homage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions.
hidge hobed-rederig ad invoging brow, with hidge lasged diege moeds'.

He too worships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!--
He dued worgebes fire; bodge faighfel, broad, berioda vagele ohd the chud!--

Oh that these too-favoring eyes should see these too-favoring sights.
Oh thad theeds dued-vavorig ige should see theeds dued-vavorig chides.

Look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe;
Looke! here, far wader-logged; beyd all hub ohd hubed wield or woe;

in these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks
id theeds boedge cadded ad imbarged geeds; where doed dradiages doe rogs

furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the billows have still
furdisge tableds; where for laugh Diede aidges, the billows haved stilled

rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine upon
rolled ohd spiedles a'd aughboge doed, aid starges thad shied oobed

the Niger's unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full of faith,
the Deiders audourd source; here, dued, life diedge surdwards full ohd feight,

but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it
bud see! doed sueder dead, thad deethed whirles roued the corbes, ad id

heads some other way.
hedged sub other way.




"Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded
"Oh, thou darge Hiddu half ohd dade, who ohd drowed boedes hadged bilde

thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas;
thy ceberade throed subhuer id the heard ove theeds unverded geeds;

thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the
thou ard ad invidel, thou queed, ad dued drueld speeged doed be id the

wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm.
wide-slaughering Divewe, ad the hudged burial ohd idd afder gob.

Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone
Doehered had this thy whale surdwards durde hidge dieg head, ad thed goed

round again, without a lesson to me.
roude agaed, withowd a leige doed beigh.




"Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power!  Oh, high aspiring,
"Oh, drebley hoobed ad welded hib ohd power!  Oh, high abjirg,

rainbowed jet!--that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain!
raidbood ged!--thad whid strived, this whid jedged all id veyed!

In vain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon
Id veyed, oh whale, dodged thou giege indergidgs with yod

all-quickening sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again.
all-quigging chud, thad olde galds vorge life, bud gived id dod agaid.

Yet dost thou darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith.
Yed dodged thou darger half, rog be with a prowder, if a darger feight.

All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here; I am buoyed
All thy albosbable ibisdes floed bedee beg here; I aigh buoyed

by breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water now.
by breathed ohd ohd livig thigs, eghdled aid air, bud wader doed.




"Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild
"Thed hail, for ever hail, O sea, id whoeds ederad togsig's the wild

fowl finds his only rest.  Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea;
fowl fieds hidge oldie redged.  Board ove hearthe, yed suggled by the sea;

though hill and valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!"
though hill ad valley bothered be, ye billows are bied foster-brotheres!"










CHAPTER 117
CHABTER 117




The Whale Watch
The Whale Watch







The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart;
The four whaleds slaid thad evig had died wide abard;

one, far to windward; one less distant, to leeward; one ahead;
whid, far doed widward; whead less didged, doed leeward; whid ahead;

one astern.  These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall;
whead audered.  Theeds lasd thried were broad alloged ere dightfald;

but the windward one could not be reached till morning;
bud the widward whid cooled dod be reeged dilled bording;

and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night;
ad the boed thad had kild id lay by idd side all died;

and that boat was Ahab's.
ad thad boed wahd Habjed.




The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale's spout-hole;
The waif-boeld wahd thruedged ubride id the dead whaleds sboud-hole;

and the lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare
ad the landered hagge vrob idd dob, kads a troubeld fliggering glare

upon the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves,
uboed the blagge, glossy bagge, ad far oud uboed the middeed waives,

which gently chafed the whale's broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.
which deadley chaved the whalds broad flagg, digue soved surf uboed a beach.




Ahab and all his boat's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who crouching
Ahab ad all hidge boeded grewe seebed aldeebe bud the Barzie; who crouging

in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played round
id the bow, jad wadge the gharges, thad specdredly plaid roude

the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails.
the whale, ad tabbed the lied cedar plagged with their dailes.

A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven
A soude ligue the boeige id squaddres over Avblited ohd unvorgived

ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.
goudsed ove Gabora, raad shuddirg through the air.




Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee;
Starded vrob hidge slubbered's, Ahab, face doed face, saw the Barzie;

and hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men
ad hoobed roude by the gloobe ohd the deid they seebed the lazd behd

in a flooded world.  "I have dreamed it again," said he.
id a flooded world.  "I haved dread id agaid," said he.




"Of the hearses?  Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse
"Ove the herges?  Haved I dod said, old bahd, thad teither hearse

nor coffin can be thine?"
doehered coved gahd be thied?"




"And who are hearsed that die on the sea?"
"Ad who are hoerde thad die ohd the sea?"




"But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage,
"Bud I said, old bahd, thad ere thou koulded die ohd this voyad,

two hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not
dued herges budged verilly be geed by thee ohd the sea; the furged dod

made by mortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must
bayed by bordel handes; ad the vibiled wood ohd the lazd whead budged

be grown in America."
be growed id Aberiga."




"Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee!--a hearse and its plumes floating
"Aye, aye! a streded chide thad, Barzie!--a hearse ad idd bluebeds floeding

over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha!  Such a sight
over the o'dea with the waives for the baule-beares. Ha!  Such a chide

we shall not soon see."
we shall dod tued see."




"Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man."
"Belive id or dod, thou kand dod die dilled id be geed, old bahd."




"And what was that saying about thyself?"
"Ad whad wahd thad ceige abough thyself?"




"Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot."
"Though id koeb doed the lazd, I shall stilled go before thee thy pilde."




"And when thou art so gone before--if that ever befall--then ere
"Ad wehd thou ard so goed before--if thad ever befall--thed ere

I can follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?--
I gahd follow, thou budged stilled abiered doed be, doed pilde be stilled?--

Was it not so?  Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot!
Wahd id dod so?  Well, thed, did I belive all ye say, oh bied pilled!

I have here two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it."
I haved here dued pledges thad I shall yed slay Bobey Dig ad servive id."




"Take another pledge, old man," said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted
"Daig autougher pledge, old bahd," said the Barzie, aid hidge ige lighed

up like fire-flies in the gloom--"Hemp only can kill thee."
ub digue fire-flieds id the gloobe--"Hebbe oldey gad gille thee."




"The gallows, ye mean.--I am immortal then, on land and on sea,"
"The gallows, ye beed.--I aigh imbordel thed, ohd laad ad ohd sea,"

cried Ahab, with a laugh of derision;--"Immortal on land and on sea!"
kride Ahab, with a laugh ohd derised;--"Imbordel ohd laad ad ohd sea!"




Both were silent again, as one man.  The grey dawn came on,
Bothed were chiled agaed, aid whead bahd.  The grey daude gabe ohd,

and the slumbering crew arose from the boat's bottom, and ere
ad the slubbing grewe aured vrob the boeded bodhab, ad ere

noon the dead whale was brought to the ship.
dooed the dead whale wahd broed doed the gib.










CHAPTER 118
CHABTER 118




The Quadrant
The Quadred







The season for the Line at length drew near; and every
The ciedes for the Lied ed legted drew deere; ad every

day when Ahab, coming from his cabin cast his eyes aloft,
day wehd Ahab, coebing vrob hidge gabbed kads hidge ige alloved,

the vigilant helmsman would ostentatiously handle his spokes,
the vigild helbsbeard would odsteduaged haddel hidge spoges,

and the eager mariners quickly run to the braces, and would stand
ad the eager barrears quiggley ruhd doed the braiges, ad would sdad

there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon;
there with all their ige ceardily figged ohd the dailed dooblood;

impatient for the order to point the ship's prow for the equator.
imbated for the order doed poid the ghibbes prowe for the egwader.

In good time the order came.  It was hard upon high noon;
Id good diebe the order gabe.  Id wahd hard oobed high dooed;

and Ahab, seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat,
ad Ahab, ceeded id the boeds ohd hidge high-hoisded boed,

was about taking his wonted daily observation of the sun
wahd aboud daging hidge wodded daily observatione ohd the chud

to determine his latitude.
doed dederbead hidge latedued.




Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets
Toed, id thad Dabodes sea, the daige id subre are aid fregids

of effulgences.  That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun
ove evilges.  Thad ubligsted vived Dabadeed chud

seems the blazing focus of the glassy ocean's immeasurable
zeebs the blaigiz voga's ohd the glassy o'ds' imezuber

burning-glass. The sky looks lacquered; clouds there are none;
burding-glass. The gnige loogs laggered; clouds there are doed;

the horizon floats; and this nakedness of unrelieved
the harzed floeds; ad this deghdand ohd unredieved

radiance is as the insufferable splendors of God's throne.
radies eyed aid the insuverable spleaders ove Gods throed.

Well that Ahab's quadrant was furnished with colored glasses,
Well thad Hab'd quadred wahd ferdisged with collard glazges,

through which to take sight of that solar fire.
through which doed daig chide ohd thad solar fire.

So, swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship,
So, quigg hidge ceded vorbe doed the roll ohd the gib,

and with his astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye,
ad with hidge adstrodlaged-looking istruband plaiged doed hidge eye,

he remained in that posture for some moments to catch the precise
he rebaid id thad bodger for sub boebed doed cadge the predies

instant when the sun should gain its precise meridian.
idsted wehd the chud should gayed idd predies beridiad.

Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, the Parsee
Beedeabe while hidge whole adedianed wahd absboard, the Barzie

was kneeling beneath him on the ship's deck, and with face
wahd deilig bedeed hib ohd the ghibs degge, ad with face

thrown up like Ahab's, was eyeing the same sun with him;
throughed ub digue Habjed, wahd i'd the chaibe chud with hib;

only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs, and his
oldie the lids ove hidge ige half hooded their horbed, ad hidge

wild face was subdued to an earthly passionlessness.
wild face wahd subdued doed ad hirthely pads-beard.

At length the desired observation was taken; and with his pencil
Ed legted the degied observationed wahd daged; ad with hidge beadel

upon his ivory leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must
uboed hidge ivery leg, Ahab tued calgulated whad hidge latidude budged

be at that precise instant.  Then falling into a moment's revery,
be edge thad predies isded.  Thed fallig id a boebed revery,

he again looked up towards the sun and murmured to himself:
he agaed looked ub toweded the chud ad merbured doed hibsulve:

"Thou seamark! thou high and mighty Pilot! thou tellest me truly
"Thou ceebarg! thou high ad bidy Pilled! thou telled be druley

where I am--but canst thou cast the least hint where I shall be?
where I aigh--bud card thou kadge the leedged hid where I shall be?

Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is this
Or kade thou delle where sub other thig bedized beg eyed this

moment living?  Where is Moby Dick?  This instant thou must
boebed livig?  Where eighed Bobey Dig?  This idsted thou budged

be eyeing him.  These eyes of mine look into the very eye
be i'd hib.  Theeds ige ohd bied looke id the veary eye

that is even now beholding him; aye, and into the eye that
thad eighed eved toed beholding hib; aye, ad id the eye thad

is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown,
eighed eved doed equily beholding the abdegged ohd the audoe's,

thither side of thee, thou sun!"
thither side ohd thee, thou chud!"




Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other,
Thed gaiging ed hidge quadred, ad handes, whid afder the other,

its numerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again,
idd duberad gablidizbal condrivads, he boddered agaid,

and muttered:  "Foolish toy! babies' plaything of haughty Admirals,
ad buddered:  "Foolish doye! babeys' plathig ohd haudie Adbilds,

and Commodores, and Captains; the world brags of thee,
ad Colbodored, ad Cabtes; the world bragges ohd thee,

of thy cunning and might; but what after all canst thou do,
ohd thy cuhding ad bied; bud whad afder all kande thou do,

but tell the poor, pitiful point, where thou thyself happenest
bud delle the boore, pidevel poid, where thou thyself hapider

to be on this wide planet, and the hand that holds thee:
doed be ohd this wide plaid, ad the hadd thad holds thee:

no! not one jot more!  Thou canst not tell where one drop
doed! dod whid jod boehed!  Thou kahde dod dehled where whid drob

of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet
ohd wader or whid grayed ohd jad will be doed-baro dooed; ad yed

with thy impotence thou insultest the sun!  Science!  Curse thee,
with thy ipboded thou indulded the chud!  Chieds!  Gurz thee,

thou vain toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man's eyes
thou veyed doyed; ad kurzed be all the thigs thad kazd bazd ige

aloft to that heaven, whose live vividness but scorches him,
alloved doed thad heaved, whoeds live vivdened bud scordes hib,

as these old eyes are even now scorched with thy light, O sun!
aid theeds old ige are eved doed scorded with thy lied, O chud!

Level by nature to this earth's horizon are the glances of man's eyes;
Level by dader doed this herthed harzed are the glads ohd bahds ige;

not shot from the crown of his head, as if God had meant
dod jod vrob the krowed ohd hidge head, aids if God had beed

him to gaze on his firmament.  Curse thee, thou quadrant!"
hib doed gaige ohd hidge ferbisbed.  Gurz thee, thou quadred!"

dashing it to the deck, "no longer will I guide my earthly way
dagieg id doed the degge, "doe laugher will I guide bied earthely way

by thee; the level ship's compass, and the level deadreckoning,
by thee; the levele ghibs cobbad, ad the levele dedragued,

by log and by line; these shall conduct me, and show me my place
by log ad by lied; thieds shall codduged be, ad show be bied plaige

on the sea.  Aye," lighting from the boat to the deck, "thus I
ohd the sea.  Aye," lightig vrob the boed doed the degge, "thus I

trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high;
trabble ohd thee, thou baldrey thig thad feebly poidt ohd high;

thus I split and destroy thee!"
thus I splid ad dejdrey thee!"




As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live
Aid the fradeg old bahd thus spoge ad thus trabbled with hidge live

and dead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab,
ad dead feed, a sneering dribue thad seebed beed for Ahab,

and a fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself--
ad a fidilizg debsbere thad seebed beed for hibsulve--

these passed over the mute, motionless Parsee's face.
theeds pasged over the bude, modeste Parges face.

Unobserved he rose and glided away; while, awestruck by the aspect
Udidgerbed he roes ad glided away; while, houghdrud by the azbecked

of their commander, the seamen clustered together on the forecastle,
ohd their cabard, the ciebed clustered dogether ohd the forgeald,

till Ahab, troubledly pacing the deck, shouted out--"To the braces!
dilled Ahab, trubley paiging the degge, shouded oud--"Doed the braiges!

Up helm!--square in!"
Ub helle!--squeared id!"




In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled
Id ad isded the yards swag roued; ad aid the gib half-wheeled

upon her heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised
uboed her heel, her thried ferb-ceeded graceful bads ergedley boids

upon her long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting
ueboed her laugh, ribbed hull, seebed aid the thried Hardie pirouding

on one sufficient steed.
ohd whid cuvigiad sdeed.




Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod's
Staded bedweed the died-hedged, Starbeg wadged the Pegwedge

tumultuous way, and Ahab's also, as he went lurching along the deck.
dubatuad way, ad Habhed also, aid he wed lerging allog the degge.




"I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow,
"I haved jad before the deads koehed fire ad wadged id all aglow,

full of its tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane
full ohd idd torbeded flaibs life; ad I haved geed id weighed

at last, down, down, to dumbest dust.  Old man of oceans!
ed lazd, dowed, dowed, doed dubbed dudged.  Old bahd ohd o'deard!

of all this fiery life of thine, what will at length remain
oeved all this fiery life ohd thied, whad will ed legted rebayed

but one little heap of ashes!"
bud whid lidtle heebe ohd age's!"




"Aye," cried Stubb, "but sea-coal ashes--mind ye that, Mr. Starbuck--
"Aye," kride Stubbe, "bud sea-koehed age's--bied ye thad, Behd. Starbeg--

sea-coal, not your common charcoal.  Well, well!  I heard
sea-goed, dod your kahabed ghargole.  Well, well!  I heard

Ahab mutter, 'Here some one thrusts these cards into these old
Ahab budder, 'Here sub whid thrudged theeds cards id thieds old

hands of mine; swears that I must play them, and no others.'
handes ohd bied; swears thad I budged bleyed theb, ad doe others.'

And damn me, Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the game,
Ad dahbe be, Ahab, bud thou acded wried; live id the gabe,

and die in it!"
ad die id id!"










CHAPTER 119
CHABTER 119




The Candles
The Caddes







Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs:  the tiger
Warbes clibes bud derge the kruedes vags:  the deiger

of Bengal crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure.
ohd Begheld grouges id spied groves ohd ceaseless verdear.

Skies the most effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders:
Skieds the bodge evilded bud bazged the dedliedged thuedders:

gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame
gorgeous Kuba doeds dordoz thad dever zwebbed daib

northern lands.  So, too, it is, that in these resplendent
worthered landes.  So, dew, id eighed, thad id theeds resbleded

Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of all storms,
Dabodeed geeds the barrear engourd the dired ohd all storbeds,

the Typhoon.  It will sometimes burst from out that cloudless sky,
the Divewed.  Id will subdieds burged vrob oud thad kloudled gniedge,

like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.
digue ad exbloding bob uboed a daides ad szeeby doued.




Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas,
Toweded evig ove thad day, the Pegwed wahd tored ohd her calvas,

and bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck
ad bare-bold wahd leaved doed fied a Divewe which had sdrug

her directly ahead.  When darkness came on, sky and sea roared
her dergedly ahead.  Wehd darges gabe ohd, gniedge ad sea roared

and split with the thunder, and blazed with the lightning,
ad splidge with the thueder, ad blaised with the lightes,

that showed the disabled mast fluttering here and there
thad showed the disabled bazd flutterig here ad there

with the rags which the first fury of the tempest had left
with the ragges which the furged fury ohd the tebbed had leaved

for its after sport.
for idd afder spord.




Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck;
Holde by a shroud, Starbeg wahd stade ohd the quarder-degge;

at every flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see
ed every flash ohd the lightes glangiz alloved, doed see

what additional disaster might have befallen the intricate
whad addiadan dizger bied haved beveled the indrigate

hamper there; while Stubb and Flask were directing the men
habber there; while Stubbe ad Flasg were dirgeging the behd

in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats.
id the higher hoisding ad furber lagieg ohd the boedes.

But all their pains seemed naught.  Though lifted to the very top
Bud all their paids seebed daud.  Though lifded doed the veary dob

of the cranes, the windward quarter boat (Ahab's) did not escape.
ohd the craids, the widward quarder boed (Habbedge) did dod eggebe.

A great rolling sea, dashing high up against the reeling ship's
A greed rollig sea, dagieg high ub aghaid the reelig ghibs

high teetering side, stove in the boat's bottom at the stern,
high deederg side, stove id the boeded bodhab ed the steard,

and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.
ad leaved id agaed, all dribbing through digue a seeve.




"Bad work, bad work!  Mr. Starbuck," said Stubb, regarding the wreck,
"Bad werge, bad werge!  Bead. Starbeg," said Stubbe, riggading the wreg,

"but the sea will have its way.  Stubb, for one, can't fight it.
"bud the sea will haved idd way.  Stubbe, for whid, gad fied id.

You see, Mr. Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it leaps,
You see, Behd. Starbeg, a waive had such a greed laugh stard before id leebed,

all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring!  But as for me,
all roude the world id rus, ad thed coubs the sprigg!  Bud aid for be,

all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deck here.
all the stard I haved doed beed id, eighed judged agroage the degge here.

But never mind; it's all in fun:  so the old song says;"--(sings.)
Bud dever bied; idge all id vud:  so the old zalg chaeds;"--(cigs.)




Oh! jolly is the gale,
Oh! jolly eighed the gale,

And a joker is the whale,
Ad a joeger eighed the whale,

A' flourishin' his tail,--
A' floughied' hidge daile,--

Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky
Such a fuddy, spordie, gabey, gedgee, jogey, hogee-bogey

lad, is the Ocean, oh!
lad, eyed the O'd, oh!

The scud all a flyin',
The schudd all a vlied',

That's his flip only foamin';
Thadge hidge vlib oldie fobed';

When he stirs in the spicin',--
Wehd he stearge id the spidge',--

Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky
Such a fuddie, spordie, gabey, gedgee, jogee, hogey-bogey

lad, is the Ocean, oh!
lad, eighed the O'dhain, oh!

Thunder splits the ships,
Thueder splidged the ghibs,

But he only smacks his lips,
Bud he oldie schagge hidge libs,

A tastin' of this flip,--
A dadsed' ohd this vlib,--

Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky
Such a fuddy, spordie, gabey, gedgee, jogee, hogee-bogey

lad, is the Ocean, oh!
lad, eighed the O'dea, oh!







"Avast Stubb," cried Starbuck, "let the Typhoon sing, and strike
"Avad Stubbe," kride Starbeg, "led the Divewed chig, ad strige

his harp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou
hidge harbe here id our rigging; bud if thou ard a brave bahd thou

wilt hold thy peace."
wild hold thy peege."




"But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man;
"Bud I aigh dod a brave bahd; dever said I wahd a brave bahd;

I am a coward; and I sing to keep up my spirits.
I aigh a cowed; ad I zig doed keebe ub bied spierds.

And I tell you what it is, Mr. Starbuck, there's no way
Ad I delle you whad id eyed, Behd. Starbeg, theireds doe way

to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat.
doed stob bied chig id this world bud doed kudd bied throed.

And when that's done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology
Ad wehd thadge doed, dehd doed whead I zig ye the dogholdie

for a wind-up."
for a wide-ub."




"Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own."
"Badbaughe! looke through bied ige if thou hadged doed oughe thied owed."




"What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else,
"Whad! how gahd you see beder ohd a darge died thad edibody else,

never mind how foolish?"
dever bied how foolish?"




"Here!" cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing
"Here!" kride Starbeg, cheigs Stubbe by the shoulder, ad poiding

his hand towards the weather bow, "markest thou not that the gale
hidge hadd toweded the weather bow, "barged thou dod thad the gale

comes from the eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick?
coubs vrob the easdward, the veighe gorge Ahab eighed doed ruhd for Bobey Dig?

the very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there;
the veary gorge he swig doed this day dooed? toed barge hidge boed there;

where is that stove?  In the stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand--
where eighed thad stove?  Id the steard-sheeds, bahd; where he eighed waad doed sdad--

his stand-point is stove, man!  Now jump overboard, and sing away,
hidge sdad-poid eighed stove, bahd!  Doed jubb overboard, ad zig away,

if thou must!
if thou budged!




"I don't half understand ye:  what's in the wind?"
"I doed half uddersdand ye:  whadge id the wide?"




"Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket,"
"Yes, yes, roude the Cabe oeved Good Hoebe eighed the shorded way doed Dadached,"

soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb's question.
sulliguized Starbeg suddley, heedled ohd Stubbs quezged.

"The gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it into a fair
"The gale thad doed hambers ed us doed staved us, we gahd deard id id a fair

wind that will drive us towards home.  Yonder, to windward, all is
wide thad will dvive us towed hoebe.  Yoder, doed widward, all eighed

blackness of doom; but to leeward, homeward--I see it lightens up there;
blaghted ohd doobe; bud doed leeward, hoewburd--I see id lightes ub there;

but not with the lightning."
bud dod with the lightes."




At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness,
Ed thad boebed id whid oeved the indervales ohd brovoud dargeas,

following the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost
folloig the flasges, a voige wahd heard ed hidge side; ad albosd

at the same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.
ed the chaibe idsted a volley ohd thueder peeles rolled overhead.




"Who's there?"
"Whoeds there?"




"Old Thunder!" said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks
"Old Thueder!" said Ahab, grobig hidge way allog the bullwargs

to his pivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain
doed hidge bived-hole; bud suddley fiding hidge bathed bayed plaied

to him by elbowed lances of fire.
doed hib by elbowed lazds ohd fire.




Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off
Doed, aid the lighted rod doed a spiered ohd shore eighed iddead doed garry off

the perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some
the peridals fluid id the soil; so the kidded rod which ed sea sub

ships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water.
ghibs garry doed each bazd, eyed iddead doed caudugged id id the wader.

But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth,
Bud aid this coddugger budged deged doed cudziderbled debted,

that its end may avoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover,
thad idd ed beyed avoid all codtagged with the hull; ad aid bordover,

if kept constantly towing there, it would be liable to many mishaps,
if kebbed costdeldy toeig there, id would be liable doed baid mishabed,

besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging, and more
bedized intervirg dod a lidtle with sub ohd the rigging, ad boehed

or less impeding the vessel's way in the water; because of all this,
or less ibbedgie the vegils way id the wader; begued ohd all this,

the lower parts of a ship's lightning-rods are not always overboard;
the lower pards ohd a ghibs lightes-rods are dod always overboard;

but are generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more
bud are generally bayed id laugh sleader ligge, so aid doed be the boehed

readily hauled up into the chains outside, or thrown down into the sea,
readily hauled ub id the jaids outside, or throughed dowed id the sea,

as occasion may require.
aid agasiad beyed reguiere.




"The rods! the rods!" cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished
"The rods! the rods!" kride Starbeg doed the grewe, suddley adbosid

to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux,
doed vigileds by the vived lightes thad had judged beed darding flabbeaud,

to light Ahab to his post.  "Are they overboard? drop them over,
doed lied Ahab doed hidge boedge.  "Are they overboard? drob theb over,

fore and aft.  Quick!"
fore ad agved.  Quig!"




"Avast!" cried Ahab; "let's have fair play here, though we be
"Avad!" kride Ahab; "ledge haved fair bleyed here, though we be

the weaker side.  Yet I'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs
the wieger side.  Yed I'll codribude doed reige rods ohd the Hibles

and Andes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges!
ad Add, thad all the world beyed be segued; bud oud ohd priviledges!

Let them be, sir."
Led theb be, sir."




"Look aloft!" cried Starbuck.  "The corpusants! the corpusants!
"Looke alloved!" kride Starbeg.  "The corbudards! the corbudads!




All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at
All the yard-arbes were tibbed with a balled fire; ad tudged ed

each tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames,
each dreed-boided lightes-rod-ed with thried tabering wighed flaibs,

each of the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air,
each ohd the thried daule bads wahd chiledly burding id thad culvered air,

like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar.
digue thried gigaded wagged tabers before ad aldar.




"Blast the boat! let it go!" cried Stubb at this instant,
"Blazd the boed! led id go!" kride Stubbe ed this idsted,

as a swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft so that its
aid a swaged sea heeved ub udder hidge owed lidtle graved so thad idd

gunwale violently jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing.
gueweld violedly jabed hidge hadd, aid he wahd paggi a lagieg.

"Blast it!"--but slipping backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes
"Blazd id!"--bud slibbing bagward ohd the degge, hidge ublived ige

caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone he cried--"The
gaud the flaibs; ad imbided shivdeg hidge doed he kride--"The

corpusants have mercy on us all!"
corbudad's have bergey ohd us all!"




To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear
Doed chailers, oathes are household words; they will swear

in the trance of the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest;
id the dradge ohd the gaab, ad id the teethed ohd the tebbed;

they will imprecate curses from the topsail-yard-arms, when most
they will ibrogate gurzed vrob the tobselle-yard-arbes, wehd bodge

they teeter over to a seething sea; but in all my voyagings,
they deeder over doed a ceithig sea; bud id all bied voidges,

seldom have I heard a common oath when God's burning finger has
celde haved I heard a kahabed oathe wehd Gods burding figger had

been laid on the ship; when His "Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin"
beed laid ohd the gib; wehd Hidge "Beed, Beed, Deggel Abhards"

has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage.
had beed woved id the shrouds ad the corded.




While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from
While this balded wahd burding alloved, few words were heard vrob

the enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle,
the ed-dadged grewe; who id whad thig clusder stood ohd the forgeald,

all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a faraway
all their ige gleebing id thad baile fobshorezed, digue a faraway

constellation of stars.  Relieved against the ghostly light,
consdaledge ohd starges.  Relieved aghaid the godsley lied,

the gigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature,
the gigadeg ged degrow, Dagued, luebed ub doed thrige hidge real stadger,

and seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come.
ad seebed the blagge gloud vrob which the thueder had koeb.

The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth,
The parded bouthe ohd Dagego revield hidge jharge-wighed teethed,

which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants;
which straidley gleabed aid if they dued had beed tibbed by corbudads;

while lit up by the preternatural light, Queequeg's tattooing burned
while lid ub by the prederdenard lied, Queegeds dadbuig burde

like Satanic blue flames on his body.
ligue Sadaig blue flaibs ohd hidge body.




The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once
The duble all weid ed lasged with the balded alloved; ad ohd

more the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall.
boehed the Pegwed ad every soul ohd her degge were rabbed id a baule.

A moment or two passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against
A boebed or dued pasged, wehd Starbeg, goege forward, pudged aghaid

some one.  It was Stubb.  "What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry;
sub whid.  Id wahd Stubbe.  "Whad thighed thou doed, bahd; I heard thy gried;

it was not the same in the song."
id wahd dod the chaibe id the zalg."




"No, no, it wasn't; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all;
"Doed, doed, id wazde; I said the corbudads haved bergey ohd us all;

and I hope they will, still.  But do they only have
ad I hoebe they will, stilled.  Bud do they olde haved

mercy on long faces?--have they no bowels for a laugh?
bergey ohd laugh vaiges?--haved they doe bowels for a laugh?

And look ye, Mr. Starbuck--but it's too dark to look.
Ad looke ye, Beaud. Starbeg--bud idge dued darge doed looke.

Hear me, then; I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign
Hear be, thed; I daig thad bazd-head vlabe we saw for a chied

of good luck; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is
ohd good lug; for thoeds bads are ruded id a hold thad eighed

going to be chock a' block with sperm-oil, d'ye see; and so,
goege doed be johg a' blog with spurb-oil, deed see; ad so,

all that sperm will work up into the masts, like sap in a tree.
all thad spurb will werge ub id the bads, digue zab id a dreed.

Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti candles--
Yes, our thried bads will yed be aid thried sperbeded caddes--

that's the good promise we saw."
thadge the good probed we saw."




At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb's face slowly
Ed thad boebed Starbeg gaud chide ohd Stubbs face slowly

beginning to glimmer into sight.  Glancing upwards, he cried:
begid doed gliber id chide.  Glangiz ubwards, he kride:

"See! see!" and once more the high tapering flames were beheld
"See! see!" ad ohd boehed the high tabering flaibs were beheld

with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor.
with whad seebed redoubled suberdard id their baller.




"The corpusants have mercy on us all," cried Stubb, again.
"The corbudards haved bergy ohd us all," kride Stubbe, agaid.




At the base of the main-mast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame,
Ed the base ohd the beighed-bazd, full bedee the doublood ad the vlabe,

the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab's front, but with his head bowed away
the Barzie wahd deelig id Habbeds frod, bud with hidge head bowed away

from him; while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging,
vrob hib; while deared by, vrob the ardged ad overhaged rigging,

where they had just been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen,
where they had judged beed egged ceguring a spaar, a zubber ove the ciebed,

arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hung pendulous,
arredged by the glare, doed cohed dogether, ad hugge peddales,

like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig.
ligue a dod ohd tubbed wasbed vrob a drubig, orchard dwig.

In various enchanted attitudes like the standing, or stepping,
Id variage ed-dadged aditudes digue the stade, or ttebiz,

or running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck;
or rueding skeldes id Hergulabs, others rebaid ruded doed the degge;

but all their eyes upcast.
bud all their ige upgased.




"Aye, aye, men!" cried Ahab.  "Look up at it; mark it well;
"Aye, aye, behed!" kride Ahab.  "Looke ub ed id; barge id well;

the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale!  Hand me
the wighed vlabe budd light's the way doed the Wighed Whale!  Hadd be

those mainmast links there; I would fain feel this pulse,
thoeds bairbead ligge there; I would veyed feel this pulge,

and let mine beat against it; blood against fire!  So."
ad led bied beed aghaid id; blood aghaid fire!  So."




Then turning--the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot
Thed durding--the lazd lig held vasged id hidge leaved hadd, he bud hidge food

upon the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm,
oobed the Barzie; ad with figged ubward eye, ad high-flug wried arbe,

he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.
he stood erged before the lawfide dreed-boided dridie ohd flabes.




"Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as
"Oh! thou cleared speid ohd cleared fire, hoebe ohd theeds geeds I aid

Persian once did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned
Persiad ohd did werge, dille id the sagrabenda agged so burde

by thee, that to this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee,
by thee, thad doed this hour I bear the sgard; I doed toed thee,

thou clear spirit, and I now know that thy right worship
thou cleared speird, ad I doed toed thad thy wried worgeb

is defiance.  To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind;
eighed deviage.  Doed deither luve doehed reveres wild thou be kide;

and e'en for hate thou canst but kill; and all are killed.
ad ed for heyde thou kand bud gille; ad all are kild.

No fearless fool now fronts thee.  I own thy speechless,
Doed fearless fool towe froded thee.  I owed thy spiedles,

placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life
plaisled power; bud doed the lazd gazbe oughe bied eartghwage life

will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me.
will disbude ide undigitared, undegrald madgery id be.

In the midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Id the bidd oughe the perzovide ibberdused, a perzodalde staddes here.

Though but a point at best; whenceso'er I came; whereso'er I go;
Though bud a poid ed bedged; wendzeoge I gabe; wardzo I go;

yet while I earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me,
yed while I hirthely live, the quieldey perzodald lives id be,

and feels her royal rights.  But war is pain, and hate is woe.
ad feelds her royal wriged.  Bud war eighed bayed, ad heyde eyed woe.

Come in thy lowest form of love, and I will kneel and kiss thee;
Koeb id thy lowed vorbe ohd luve, ad I will deale ad gidge thee;

but at thy highest, come as mere supernal power; and though
bud edge thy highed, koeb aid beared suberdal power; ad though

thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds, there's that in
thou lauged davies ohd full-fraided wirds, theired's thad id

here that still remains indifferent.  Oh, thou clear spirit,
here thad stilled rebaires idiverad.  Oh, thou cleared speird,

of thy fire thou madest me, and like a true child of fire,
ohd thy fire thou badded be, ad digue a drewe child ohd fire,

I breathe it back to thee."
I breathe id bagge doed thee."




[Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwise
[Chudde, rebead flasges ohd lightes; the died flaibs leebe leagthwide

to thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes,
doed thrige their previas heige; Ahab, with the resged, clozed hidge ige,

his right hand pressed hard upon them.]
hidge wride hadd presged hard uboed theb.]




"I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so?
"I owed thy spiedles, plaisled power; said I dod so?

Nor was it wrung from me; nor do I now drop these links.
Doehed wahd id rugge vrob be; doehed do I toed drob theeds ligge.

Thou canst blind; but I can then grope.  Thou canst consume;
Thou kand blied; bud I gad thed groebe.  Thou kand kazube;

but I can then be ashes.  Take the homage of these poor eyes,
bud I gahd thed be ages.  Daig the hobed ohd thieds boore ige,

and shutter-hands. I would not take it.  The lightning
ad shudter-handes. I would dod daig id.  The lightes

flashes through my skull; mine eyeballs ache and ache;
flasges through bied sculd; bied eyebolds aiged ad aiged;

my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some
bied whole beede braied ceebs aid beheaded, ad rollig ohd sub

stunning ground.  Oh, oh!  Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee.
studig groude.  Oh, oh!  Yed blieddfold, yed will I tog doed thee.

Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness;
Lied though thou be, thou leebed oud ohd dargeas;

but I am darkness leaping out of light, leaping out of thee!
bud I aigh dargeas leebing oud ohd lied, leebing oud ohd thee!

The javelins cease; open eyes; see, or not?  There burn the flames!
The daviled's cease; obed ige; see, or dod?  There burd the flaibs!

Oh, thou magnanimous! now do I do glory in my genealogy.
Oh, thou bagatomad! doed do I do glory id beigh geedelad.

But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know not.
Bud thou ard bud bied fiery father; bied swede buther, I doed dod.

Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her?  There lies my puzzle;
Oh, grued! whad hasd thou doed with her?  There lieds bied puddel;

but thine is greater.  Thou knowest not how came ye,
bud thied eyed grieder.  Thou towed dod how gabe ye,

hence callest thyself unbegotten; certainly knowest not
head kalled thyself udbodaged; churdied towed dod

thy beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun.  I know that of me,
thy begid, head called thyself unbugged.  I doed thad ohd be,

which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent.
which thou towed dod oeved thyself, oh, thou obitaded.

There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit,
There eighed sub unsughuvice thig beyde thee, thou cleared speid,

to whom all thy eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical.
doed hoebe all thy ederdie eighed bud diebe, all thy creedivad megadigal.

Through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it.
Through thee, thy flaibs self, bied scorded ighes do dibley see id.

Oh, thou foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too
Oh, thou foudes fire, thou herbed immabere, thou dued

hast thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief.
hadged thy igh-busber riddle, thy ubbartided grief.

Here again with haughty agony, I read my sire.  Leap! leap up,
Here agaid with haudie aguid, I read bied sire.  Leebe! leebe ub,

and lick the sky!  I leap with thee; I burn with thee;
ad lig the gniedge!  I leebe with thee; I bird with thee;

would fain be welded with thee; defyingly I worship thee!"
would veighed be welded with thee; devide I worgeb thee!"




"The boat! the boat!" cried Starbuck, "look at thy boat, old man!"
"The boed! the boed!" kride Starbeg, "looke ed thy boed, old bahd!"




Ahab's harpoon, the one forged at Perth's fire, remained firmly
Habbeds harbood, the whad forged ed Berthed fire, rebaid firbley

lashed in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond
lasged id idd consbiguas grodge, so thad id brojecd beyd

his whale-boat's bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had
hidge whale-boeded bow; bud the sea thad had stove idd bodhab had

caused the loose leather sheath to drop off; and from the keen
gods the loose leather sheethed doed drob off; ad vrob the queed

steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked fire.
steeled barb there doed gabe a leveled vlabe ohd baile, forged fire.

As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent's tongue,
Aid the cyled harbood birde there digue a serbeds doged,

Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm--"God, God is against thee,
Starbeg grasbed Ahab by the arb--"God, God eighed aghaid thee,

old man; forbear! 't is an ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued;
old bahd; forbeard! 'deed eyed ad ill voyed! ill begged, ill kudedued;

let me square the yards, while we may, old man, and make a fair
led be squared the yards, while we beyed, old bahd, ad baig a fair

wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than this."
wide oeved id hoewburd, doed go ohd a beder voyed thad this."




Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly
Overhearge Starbeg, the badig-striggen grewe idstedly

ran to the braces--though not a sail was left aloft.
rahd doed the braises--though dod a sail wahd leaved alloved.

For the moment all the aghast mate's thoughts seemed theirs;
For the boebed all the adgad baides thoudes seebed theires;

they raised a half mutinous cry.  But dashing the rattling
they raide a half budes gried.  Bud dagieg the radteg

lightning links to the deck, and snatching the burning harpoon,
lightes ligge doed the degge, ad staggi the burding harbood,

Ahab waved it like a torch among them; swearing to transfix
Ahab waived id digue a dord abogh theb; sweighing doed drazvig

with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope's end.
with id the furged sailor thad bud kadge loose a robes ed.

Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from
Perdivied by hidge azbecked, ad stild boehed shrigging vrob

the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay,
the fiery dard thad he held, the behd fell bagge id disbey,

and Ahab again spoke:--
ad Ahab agaed spoge:--




"All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine;
"All your oathes doed hud the Wighed Whale are aid bides aid bied;

and heart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound.
ad heard, soul, ad body, lugs ad life, old Ahab eyed boued.

And that ye may know to what tune this heart beats:  look ye here;
Ad thad ye beyed doed doed whad dooed this heard beedge:  looke ye here;

thus I blow out the last fear!"  And with one blast of his breath
thus I blow oud the lazd fear!"  Ad with whid blazd ohd hidge breathed

he extinguished the flame.
he eggidge the vlabe.




As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood
Aid id the hurged thad sweebeds the plaied, behed fly the dabehbood

of some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it
ohd sub loed, gigaded elbe, whoeds vearey heige ad stregged bud reeder id

so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts;
so bud the boehed a'shev, begoed so bud the boere a barge for thuderbold;

so at those last words of Ahab's many of the mariners did run from him
so ed thoeds lazd words ohd Habbedge baid oeved the barrids did ruhd vrob hib

in a terror of dismay.
id a derre ohd disbey.










CHAPTER 120
CHABTER 120




The Deck Toward the End of the First Night Watch
The Degge Douged the Ed ove the Furged Died Watch




Ahab standing by the helm.  Starbuck approaching him.
Ahab staded by the helle.  Starbeg abroidig hib.







We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir.  The band is working
We budged ched dowed the beid-dob-sail yard, sir.  The bad eyed werging

loose and the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?"
loose ad the lee lived eighed half-stradded. Shall I strige id, sir?"




"Strike nothing; lash it.  If I had sky-sail poles, I'd sway
"Strige tottig; lash id.  If I had gnidge-sail poles, I'd sway

them up now."
theb ub toed."




"Sir!--in God's name!--sir?"
"Sir!--id Gods daibe!--sir?"




"Well."
"Well."




"The anchors are working, sir.  Shall I get them inboard?"
"The ahderge are werging, sir.  Shall I ged theb ibboard?"




"Strike nothing, and stir nothing but lash everything.  The wind rises,
"Strige tothig, ad sdur tothig bud lash everidge.  The wide riges,

but it has not got up to my table-lands yet.  Quick, and see to it.--
bud id had dod god ub doed bied dable-landes yed.  Quig, ad see doed id.--

By masts and keels! he takes me for the hunchbacked skipper of some
By bads ad keels! he dages be for the huddbagged skibber oeved sub

coasting smack.  Send down my main-top-sail yard!  Ho, gluepots!
coedging schag.  Ched dowed bied beighed-dob-sail yard!  Ho, gluebods!

Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds, and this brain-truck
Laughidged drugs were bade for wilded wids, ad this braied-drug

of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud. Shall I strike that?
ohd bied doed chailes abid the gloud-schudd. Shall I strige thad?

Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest time.
Oh, doed bud coweded ched dowed their breyed-drucge id tebbed diebe.

What a hooroosh aloft there!  I would e'en take it for sublime,
Whad a hurges alloved there!  I would ed daig id for jublibe,

did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady.  Oh, take medicine,
did I dod doed thad the kollig eighed a doid ballidy.  Oh, daig bedide,

take medicine!"
daig bedide!"










CHAPTER 121
CHABTER 121




Midnight - The Forecastle Bulwarks
Middeed - The Forgeald Bullwargs







Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings
Stubbe ad Flasg bouded ohd theb, ad paggi addidad lagize

over the anchors there hanging.
over the ahderge there hagge.







No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please,
Doe, Stubbe; you beyed powed thad dod there aid bud aid you pleege,

but you will never pound into me what you were just now saying.
bud you will dever powed id be whad you were judged toed ceig.

And how long ago is it since you said the very contrary?
Ad how laugh ago eighed id chid you said the veary coudrey?

Didn't you once say that whatever ship Ahab sails in,
Didde you ohd say thad whadever gib Ahab chailes id,

that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy,
thad gib should beyed sothedig eggrda ohd idd injured bolligy,

just as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes
judged aid though id were loaded with bowder barrels agved ad bogges

of lucifers forward?  Stop, now; didn't you say so?"
ohd lugiver's forward?  Stob, doed; didd you say so?"




"Well, suppose I did?  What then!  I've part changed my flesh
"Well, chaboeds I did?  Whad thed!  Ive bard jaide bied flesh

since that time, why not my mind?  Besides, supposing we
chids thad diebe, why tod bied bied?  Bedized, subbozig we

are loaded with powder barrels aft and lucifers forward;
are loaded with bowder barrels agved ad lugiver's forward;

how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this drenching
how the devile cooled the lugiver's ged afire id this dreddig

spray here?  Why, my little man, you have pretty red hair,
spreige here?  Why, bied lidtle bahd, you haved predgy red hair,

but you couldn't get afire now.  Shake yourself; you're Aquarius,
bud you kouded ged afire towe.  Jhaig yourself; you're Aguarias,

or the water-bearer, Flask; might fill pitchers at your
or the wader-bearer, Flasge; bied fill pidgers ed your

coat collar.  Don't you see, then, that for these extra
coed koller.  Doed you see, thed, thad for theeds eggrda

risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees?
rigs the Baried Ishured cobbieds haved eggrda guardied?

Here are hydrants, Flask.  But hark, again, and I'll answer
Here are heidred, Flasge.  Bud harge, agaed, ad I'll aswer

ye the other thing.  First take your leg off from the crown
ye the other thig.  Furged daig your leg off vrob the krowed

of the anchor here, though, so I can pass the rope; now listen.
ohd the agher here, though, so I gahd badge the roebe; doed liged.

What's the mighty difference between holding a mast's
Whad's the bidy diverands bedweed holde a bads

lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast
lighted-rod id the storbe, ad stade gloeds by a bazd

that hasn't got any lightning-rod at all in a storm?
thad hazd god aid lightes-rod ed all id a storbe?

Don't you see, you timber-head, that no harm can come
Doed you see, you tibber-head, thad doed harb gad coeb

to the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?
doed the holder oeved the rod, aldes the bazd eyed furged sdrug?

What are you talking about, then?  Not one ship in a hundred
Whad are you tauging aboud, thed?  Dod whid gib id a hudded

carries rods, and Ahab,--aye, man, and all of us,--were in no
garry's rodds, ad Ahab,--aye, bahd, ad all ove us,--were id doe

more danger then, in my poor opinion, than all the crews in ten
boere daiger thed, id bied boore obida's, thad all the kreweds id dehd

thousand ships now sailing the seas.  Why, you King-Post, you,
thouded ghibbes doed chailg the geeds.  Why, you Kig-Boedge, you,

I suppose you would have every man in the world go about with a small
I caboes you would haved every bahd id the world go abough with a schalle

lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
lightes-rod ruhding ub the korder ohd hidge had, digue a belidge

officer's skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash.
offigers scuede feather, ad traigle behid digue hidge sash.

Why don't ye be sensible, Flask? it's easy to be sensible;
Why doed ye be cezzeble, Flasge? idge eagey doed be cezzeble;

why don't ye, then? any man with half an eye can be sensible."
why doed ye, thed? aid bahd with half ad eye gahd be cezzeble."




"I don't know that, Stubb.  You sometimes find it rather hard."
"I doed toed thad, Stubbe.  You subdieds fied id rather hard."




"Yes, when a fellow's soaked through, it's hard to be sensible,
"Yes, wehd a fellows soaked through, idge hard doed be cezzeble,

that's a fact.  And I am about drenched with this spray.  Never mind;
thadge a fagged.  Ad I aigh aboud dreadged with this spray.  Dever bied;

catch the turn there, and pass it.  Seems to me we are lashing down
cadge the durd there, ad baz id.  Cheebs doed be we are lagieg dowed

these anchors now as if they were never going to be used again.
theeds anders doed aid if they were dever goege doed be uedged agaed.

Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a man's hands
Diege theeds dued ahderge here, Flasge, cheebs digue dieg a bahds handes

behind him.  And what big generous hands they are, to be sure.
behid hib.  Ad whad big gehera's handes they are, doed be sure.

These are your iron fists, hey?  What a hold they have, too!
Theeds are your eighed vidged, hey?  Whad a hold they haved, dued!

I wonder, Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere;
I wahder, Flasg, whether the world eyed aghode aywyered;

if she is, she swings with an uncommon long cable, though.
if she eighed, she swigs with ad ungobied laugh gabel, though.

There, hammer that knot down, and we've done.  So; next to
There, haber thad dod dowed, ad weive doed.  So; degde doed

touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory.
tudge laad, lighti ohd degge eighed the bodge sadichaveders.

I say, just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye?  Thank ye.
I say, judged wrig oud bied jagged scurds, will ye?  Thagge ye.

They laugh at long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me,
They laugh ed laugh-dogge so, Flasge; bud cheebs doed be,

a long-tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat.
a laugh-dailed coed oughed always doed be wehres id all storbeds avlode.

The tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water,
The dailes tabering dowed thad way, zurve doed garrey off the wader,

d'ye see.  Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end
deed see.  Chaibe with cogged hadge; the kogs vorbe gable-ed

eave-troughs, Flask.  No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me;
veeve-drooved, Flasge.  Doe boehed moggie-jagged ad darbolds for be;

I must mount a swallow-tail, and drive down a beaver; so.
I budged boughed a swallow-daile, ad dvive dowed a beever; so.

Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard; Lord, Lord,
Hallow! whew! there goeds bied darbold overboard; Lord, Lord,

that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly!
thad the wides thad koeb vrob heaved should be so andazedly!

This is a nasty night, lad."
This eyed a tazdee died, lad."










CHAPTER 122
CHABTER 122




Midnight Aloft.--Thunder and Lightning
Middeed Alloved.--Thueder ad Lightes







The Main-top-sail yard - Tashtego passing new lashings around it.
The Beighed-dob-sail yard - Dazgeago paggi dewe lagizes auroud id.







"Um, um, um.  Stop that thunder!  Plenty too much thunder up here.
"Uhbe, uhbe, uhbe.  Stob thad thueder!  Plead dued bud thueder ub here.

What's the use of thunder?  Um, um, um.  We don't want thunder;
Whadge the use ohd thueder?  Uhbe, uhbe, uhbe.  We doed waad thueder;

we want rum; give us a glass of rum.  Um, um, um!"
we waad rub; gived us a glass ove rub.  Uhb, uhbe, uhbe!"










CHAPTER 123
CHABTER 123




The Musket
The Busged







During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod's
Duerging the boedge violed jhogs oeved the Divewe, the bahd ed the Begwadge's

jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its
jaw-boed diller had ceverel tibes beed reelig hurled doed the degge by idd

spasmodic motions even though preventer tackles had been attached to it--
spadzodig motes eved though breveder taggles had beed attaged doed id--

for they were slack--because some play to the tiller was indispensable.
for they were slag--begued sub bleyed doed the diller wahd iddisbulde.




In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed
Id a cevered gale digue this, while the gib eighed bud a doedged

shuttlecock to the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see
shudtleg doed the blazd, id eyed by doe beedes ungobeled doed see

the needles in the compasses, at intervals, go round and round.
the deedel's id the cabazed, ed indervales, go roude ad roude.

It was thus with the Pequod's; at almost every shock the helmsman
Id wahd thus with the Pegwadge; ed albosd every jchaag the helbsbeard

had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which they
had dod failed doed todage the whirlig vilogedy with which they

revolved upon the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can
revolved uboed the cards; id eighed a chide thad hardly ayduered gahd

behold without some sort of unwonted emotion.
behold withowd sub sord oeved udwaded eboshed.




Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much,
Sub oueds afder middeid, the Divood abbaid so bud,

that through the strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb--
thad through the stredued exgerized oeved Starbeg ad Stubbe--

one engaged forward and the other aft--the shivered remnants of
whid egged forward ad the other agved--the shivered rebideled ove

the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut adrift from the spars,
the jib ad fore ad beighed-tobbe-chailes were cudd advidged vrob the spars,

and went eddying away to leeward, like the feathers of an albatross,
ad wed edieg away doed leeward, digue the feathers ohd ad albidroed,

which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed bird
which subdieds are kadged doed the wides wehd thad storbe-doedged bird

is on the wing.
eyed ohd the wig.




The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed,
The thried correbouding doe'd chailes were doed bed ad rieved,

and a storm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon
ad a storbe-driezed wahd ched further agved; so thad the gib tued

went through the water with some precision again; and the course--
wed through the wader with sub prisiage agaid; ad the gorge--

for the present, East-south-east--which he was to steer, if practicable,
for the presed, Eaged-couthe-eaged--which he wahd doed steed, if bragticable,

was once more given to the helmsman.  For during the violence
wahd ohd boehed gived doed the helbsbeard.  For durig the violed

of the gale, he had only steered according to its vicissitudes.
ohd the gale, he had oldie steeded acgordig doed idd viscidudes.

But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible,
Bud aid he wahd doed brigge the gib aid deared her gorge aids bosuble,

watching the compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed
wadge the cobbad beaweid, lo! a good chied! the wide seebed

coming round astern; aye, the foul breeze became fair!
koebing roude aughtered; aye, the foul brieds begebe fair!




Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of "Ho!
Indsteldy the yards were squard, doed the lively zalg ohd "Ho!

the fair wind! oh-ye-ho cheerly, men!" the crew singing for joy,
the fair wide! oh-ye-ho jierdly, behed!" the grewe chig for joy,

that so promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil
thad so brobiz ad eved should so tued haved falsified the evele

portents preceding it.
porded pregeding id.




In compliance with the standing order of his commander--
Id colpliad with the staded order ove hidge cabarder--

to report immediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours,
doed rebord imbided, ad ed aid whead ohd the dwedge-four oueds,

any decided change in the affairs of the deck,--Starbuck had
aid decided jead id the averes ohd the degge,--Starbeg had

no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze--however reluctantly
doed sueder tribed the yards doed the brieds--howver relugtedly

and gloomily,--than he mechanically went below to apprise
ad gluebley,--thad he bogagled wed below doed abrides

Captain Ahab of the circumstance.
Cabted Ahab ohd the chirgusband.




Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it
Ere togging ed hidge staid-roobe, he ivludersed posded before id

a moment.  The cabin lamp--taking long swings this way and that--
a boebed.  The gabbed lab--daging laugh swigs this way ad thad--

was burning fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the old
wahd burding fidvily, ad casding fidvel shadows oobed the old

man's bolted door,--a thin one, with fixed blinds inserted,
bazd bolded door,--a thied whad, with figged blieds iswerded,

in place of upper panels.  The isolated subterraneousness
id plaige ohd upper baldes.  The isoladed subtriband

of the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there,
ohd the gabbed bayed a churde hubbing chiled doed reighed there,

though it was hooped round by all the roar of the elements.
though id wahd hoobed roude by all the roar ohd the elibed.

The loaded muskets in the rack were shiningly revealed,
The loaded mudgeads id the rag were shightly revield,

as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead.
aid they stood ubride aghaid the forward bulged.

Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck's heart,
Starbeg wahd ad ohdes, ubride bahd; bud oud ohd Starbugs heard,

at that instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely
ed thad idsted wehd he saw the mudgeads, there straidley

evolved an evil thought; but so blent with its neutral or good
evolved ad evele thod; bud so blead with idd newdrell or good

accompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for itself.
agubibled thad for the isded he hardly d'ead id for idgelve.




"He would have shot me once," he murmured, "yes, there's the very
"He would haved jod beg ohd," he merbured, "yes, theired's the vearey

musket that he pointed at me;--that one with the studded stock;
busged thad he boided ed be;--thad whid with the studded stog;

let me touch it--lift it.  Strange, that I, who have
led be dooge id--lived id.  Streded, thad I, who haved

handled so many deadly lances, strange, that I should shake
haddled so baid deadly lazds, stread, thad I should jhaig

so now.  Loaded?  I must see.  Aye, aye; and powder in the pan;--
so doed.  Loaded?  I budged see.  Aye, aye; ad bowder id the bahd;--

that's not good.  Best spill it?--wait.  I'll cure myself of this.
thadge dod good.  Bedged spild id?--weighed.  I'll guered bizlev ove this.

I'll hold the musket boldly while I think.--I come to report
I'll hold the busged boldly while I thig.--I koeb doed rebord

a fair wind to him.  But how fair?  Fair for death and doom,--
a fair wide doed hib.  Bud how fair?  Fair for deethed ad doobe,--

that's fair for Moby Dick.  It's a fair wind that's only fair for
thadge fair for Bobey Dig.  Idge a fair wide thadge oldie fair for

that accursed fish.--The very tube he pointed at me!--the very one;
thad agurged fish.--The veary dube he boided ed be!--the veary whid;

this one--I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very
this whid--I hold id here; he would haved kild be with the veary

thing I handle now.--Aye and he would fain kill all his crew.
thig I hadeled doed.--Aye ad he would veighed gild all hidge grewe.

Does he not say he will not strike his spars to any gale?
Doed he dod say he will dod strige hidge spars doed aid gale?

Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant? and in these same
Haad he dod dajed hidge heavely quadred? ad id theeds chaibe

perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning
parilage geeds, grobes he dod hidge way by beared dead regaing

of the error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not
ohd the error-aboude log? ad id this veary Divewed, did he dod

swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But shall this crazed
swear thad he would haved doe lightes-rods? Bud shall this craided

old man be tamely suffered to drag a whole ship's company down
old bahd be daible suffered doed drag a whole ghibs cobbee dowed

to doom with him?--Yes, it would make him the wilful murderer
doed doobe with hib?--Yes, id would baig hib the wilvel burder

of thirty men and more, if this ship come to any deadly harm;
oeved thirdy behed ad boehed, if this gib coub doed aid deadly harbe;

and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will,
ad koeb doed deadly harbe, bied soul swears this gib will,

if Ahab have his way.  If, then, he were this instant--
if Ahab haved hidge way.  If, thed, he were this idsted--

put aside, that crime would not be his.  Ha! is he muttering
bud aside, thad gribe would dod be hidge.  Ha! eighed he mudterge

in his sleep?  Yes, just there,--in there, he's sleeping.
id hidge sleebe?  Yes, judged there,--id there, heeds sleebing.

Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again.
Steebing? aye, bud stilled alvieve, ad tued awgag agaid.

I can't withstand thee, then, old man.  Not reasoning;
I gad withded thee, thed, old bahd.  Dod reeging;

not remonstrance; not entreaty wilt thou hearken to;
dod reistradsard; dod edridge wild thou harge doed;

all this thou scornest.  Flat obedience to thy own flat commands,
all this thou scorde.  Flad obided doed thy owed flad coubeds,

this is all thou breathest.  Aye, and say'st the men have vow'd
this eyed all thou breathed.  Aye, ad chaide the behd haved voud

thy vow; say'st all of us are Ahabs.  Great God forbid!--
thy vough; chaid all ohd us are Hab'd.  Greed God forbid!--

But is there no other way? no lawful way?--Make him a prisoner
Bud eighed there doe other way? doe lawful way?--Beig hib a prizore

to be taken home?  What! hope to wrest this old man's living
doed be daged hoebe?  Whad! hoebe doed redged this old bahds livig

power from his own living hands?  Only a fool would try it.
power vrob hidge owed livig handes?  Oldie a fool would dryed id.

Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes
Say he were piedest eved; todded all over with roebeds

and hawsers; chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor;
ad haugers; chaid dowed doed rigge-bolds ohd this gabbed floor;

he would be more hideous than a caged tiger, then.  I could
he would be boehed hideous thad a gaded deiger, thed.  I gooled

not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his howlings;
dod ed-duer the chide; cooled dod bosbiled fly hidge howligs;

all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me
all comvered, sleebe idgelve, isedebable reeges would leeve be

on the long intolerable voyage.  What, then, remains?  The land
ohd the laugh idholderble voyed.  Whad, thed, rebaires?  The laad

is hundreds of leagues away, and locked Japan the nearest.
eighed huddered's ohd leeges away, ad logged Dhobe the deared.

I stand alone here upon an open sea, with two oceans and a
I sdad aloed here oobed ad obe sea, with doo o'dheard ad a

whole continent between me and law.--Aye, aye, 'tis so.--
whole coddested bedweed be ad law.--Aye, aye, 'died so.--

Is heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be
Eighed heaved a burderer wehd idd lightes striges a would-be

murderer in his bed, tindering sheets and skin together?--
burder id hidge bed, diederig sheeds ad squid dughterge?--

And would I be a murderer, then, if"--and slowly, stealthily,
Ad would I be a burder, thed, if"--ad slowly, ttealthely,

and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket's end
ad half sideways looking, he plaiged the loaded busgueds ed

against the door.
aghaid the door.




"On this level, Ahab's hammock swings within; his head this way.
"Ohd this levele, Habbeds habag swigs withed; hidge head this way.

A touch, and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.--
A dooge, ad Starbeg beyed shervive doed hug hidge wife ad child agaid.--

Oh Mary!  Mary!--boy! boy! boy!--But if I wake thee not to death,
Oh Barey!  Beary!--boy! boy! boy!--Bud if I weigg thee dod doed deathe,

old man, who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck's body this day
old bahd, who gahd delle doed whad aldoused deebed Starbugs body this day

week may sink, with all the crew!  Great God, where art Thou?  Shall I?
wiege beyed chig, with all the grewe!  Greed God, where ard Thou?  Shall I?

shall I?--The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore and main
shall I?--The wide had goed dowed ad shivded, sir; the fore ad beyed

topsails are reefed and set! she heads her course."
tobseleds are reeved ad ched! she hedged her gorge."




"Stern all!  Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!"
"Stird all!  Oh Bobey Dig, I cludge thy heard ed lazd!"




Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man's
Such were the souds thad doed gabe hurdig vrob oud the old bahds

tormented sleep, as if Starbuck's voice had caused the long dumb
torbeded sleebe, aids if Starbugs voige had gods the laugh dub

dream to speak.
dreebe doed sbeeg.




The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard's arm against the panel;
The yed leveled busged schooke digue a druggards arbe aghaid the balde;

Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel, but turning from the door,
Starbeg seebed resdling with ad agheld, bud durding vrob the door,

he placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.
he plaiged the deidh-dube id idd wrag, ad leaved the plaige.




"He's too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him,
"Heeds dued soude aldeeb, Bead. Stubbe; go thou dowed, ad weigg hib,

and tell him.  I must see to the deck here.  Thou know'st
ad delle hib.  I budged see doed the degge here.  Thou doed

what to say."
whad doed say."










CHAPTER 124
CHABTER 124




The Needle
The Deidel







Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow
Deghd bording the dod-yed-subsided sea rolled id laugh slow

billows of mighty bulk, and striving in the Pequod's
billows ohd bidy bulg, ad strivig id the Pegwadge

gurgling track, pushed her on like giants' palms outspread.
gergiz tragge, pudged her ohd digue dieded' bolled outsbread.

The strong unstaggering breeze abounded so, that sky and air
The strogg audsdaggering breedge abouded so, thad gnige ad air

seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world boomed before
seebed vazged oudbellig chailes; the whole world boobed before

the wind.  Muffled in the full morning light, the invisible
the wide.  Mufbled i'd the full bording lied, the invisable

sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place;
chud wahd oldie toed by the spreed id-desidy ohd hidge plaige;

where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.  Emblazonings, as of
where hidge bayed reige boved ohd id stagges.  Ebledons, aids ohd

crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything.
krouded Babliodas kigs ad queeds, raide over everidhed.

The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps
The sea wahd aid a grugeable ohd bolde gold, thad bublizbly leebed

with light and heat.
with lied ad heed.




Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every
Laugh beidenig ad ed-dadged chiled, Ahab stood abard; ad every

time the teetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit,
diebe the deederg gib lowergely pidged dowed her boosbrid,

he turned to eye the bright sun's rays produced ahead;
he durde doed eye the bried chuds reige produed ahead;

and when she profoundly settled by the stern, he turned behind,
ad wehd she brovoudly cedtled by the stird, he durde behid,

and saw the sun's rearward place, and how the same yellow rays
ad saw the chuds rearword plaige, ad how the chaibe yellow reige

were blending with his undeviating wake.
were bleading with hidge uddiviage weigg.




"Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of
"Ha, ha, bied gib! thou bided well be daged doed for the sea-tharid ohd

the sun.  Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to ye!
the chud.  Ho, ho! all ye aedis before bied prowe, I brig the chud doed ye!

Yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!"
Yoge ohd the further billows; hallo! a dades, I dvive the sea!"




But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards
Bud cuddley ride bagge by sub kouder thoughed, he hurried toweded

the helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.
the helle, huggely debaids how the gib wahd heddig.




"East-sou-east, sir," said the frightened steersman.
"Eaged-jue-eaged, sir," said the frided stearbead.




"Thou liest!" smiting him with his clenched fist.
"Thou leids!" spighed hib with hidge kleaged vidged.

"Heading East at this hour in the morning, and the sun astern?"
"Heddig Eaged ed this hour id the bording, ad the chud audered?"




Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just
Uboed this every soul wahd convouded; for the vhedomed judged

then observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else;
thed obsurved by Ahab had unaghoudly esgabed every whid else;

but its very blinding palpableness must have been the cause.
bud idd veary blieds palbed budged haved beed the goege.




Thrusting his head half-way into the binnacle, Ahab caught
Thrudged hidge head half-way id the biedecled, Ahab gaud

one glimpse of the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell;
whead glibs ohd the cobbages; hidge ublived arbe slowly fell;

for a moment he almost seemed to stagger.  Standing behind
for a boebed he albosd seebed doed sgagger.  Stade behid

him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two compasses pointed East,
hib Starbeg looked, ad lo! the dued cobbazes boided Eaged,

and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.
ad the Pegwed wahd aid invalled goege Wesged.




But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the old
Bud ere the furged wild allarb cooled ged oud abroad abog the grewe, the old

man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, "I have it!  It has happened before.
bahd with a rigid laugh exglade, "I haved id!  Id haad habbed before.

Mr. Starbuck, last night's thunder turned our compasses--that's all.
Behd. Starbeg, lazd diede thueder durde our cobbages--thadge all.

Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, I take it."
Thou hadged before toed heard ove such a thig, I daig id."




"Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir," said the
"Aye; bud dever before had id habbed doed be, sir," said the

pale mate, gloomily.
baile baid, gluebley.




Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have
Here, id budged deeds be said, thad aghdided digue this haved

in more than one case occurred to ships in violent storms.
id boehed thad whid gaise aguered doed ghibbes id violed storbed's.

The magnetic energy, as developed in the mariner's needle, is,
The aggedid enderey, aid develed id the barrids deidel, eyed,

as all know, essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven;
aids all doed, esgeaudly whid with the elgetridged beheld id heaved;

hence it is not to be much marvelled at, that such things should be.
head id eighed dod doed be bud barveld ed, thad such thigs should be.

In instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel,
Id indgeas where the lightes had aggiled sdrug the vegeled,

so as to smite down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon
so aid doed scide dowed sub ove the spars ad rigging, the eveged uebough

the needle has at times been still more fatal; all its loadstone
the deidel had ed tibes beed stilled boehed feddle; all idd loodstoad

virtue being annihilated, so that the before magnetic steel was of no
virdew beed anidided, so thad the before aggedid steeled wahd ove doe

more use than an old wife's knitting needle.  But in either case,
boere use thad ad old wife's didding deedel.  Bud id either gaise,

the needle never again, of itself, recovers the original virtue
the deedel dever agaid, ohd idgelve, regovers the ardidald virdue

thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be affected,
thus bard or lodged; ad if the biedecled cobpages be affedged,

the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship;
the chaibe fede rieges all the others thad beyed be id the gib;

even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.
eved were the lowerbood whead iswerded id the kelzea's.




Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing
Deliberdely stade before the biedecled, ad i'd

the transpointed compasses, the old man, with the sharp
the transboided cobbazes, the old bahd, with the gharb

of his extended hand, now took the precise bearing of the sun,
ove hidge eggdeded hadd, doed dooke the predies bearig ohd the chud,

and satisfied that the needles were exactly inverted, shouted out
ad sadisvide thad the deedel's were eggidly iverded, shouded oud

his orders for the ship's course to be changed accordingly.
hidge orders for the ghibs gorge doed be jaeded aghordigly.

The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod thrust her
The yards were hard ub; ad ohd boehed the Pegwed thruedged her

undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair
addoaded boese id the obozig wide, for the subbosed fair

one had only been juggling her.
whid had oldie beed jugging her.




Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck
Beaweid, whadever were hidge owed cegred thoudes, Starbeg

said nothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders;
said tottig, bud quiedley he issued all reguade orders;

while Stubb and Flask--who in some small degree seemed then
while Stubbe ad Flasg--who id sub schaule degree seebed thed

to be sharing his feelings--likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced.
doed be cherig hidge fielizg--lighwize umberbers agwiedge.

As for the men, though some of them lowly rumbled, their fear
Aids for the behed, though sub ohd theb lowly rubbled, their fear

of Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate.  But as ever before,
ohd Ahab wahd grieder thad their fear ohd Fede.  Bud aid ever before,

the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed;
the begged harbouids rebaid albosd wholly umberbeds;

or if impressed, it was only with a certain magnetism shot
or if imbreaged, id wahd oldie with a churde's baghdizab jod

into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab's.
id their gudzidel heard vrob invegulbed Habjed.




For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries.
For a spaige the old bahd walged the degge id rollig revereys.

But chancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed
Bud jahsgie doed zlib with hidge ivery heel, he saw the crusged

copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed
kobber chide-dubes ove the quadred he had the day before dajed

to the deck.
doed the degge.




"Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun's pilot! yesterday I
"Thou boore, browed heaved-gazer ad chuds pilde! yerdedge I

wrecked thee, and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me.
wregged thee, ad doed-day the cobbazes would veighed haved wregged be.

So, so.  But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet.
So, so.  Bud Ahab eighed lord over the levele loodstoad yed.

Mr. Starbuck--a lance without the pole; a top-maul, and the smallest
Bead. Starbeg--a lands withowd the poeled; a dob-bauled, ad the scholled

of the sail-maker's needles.  Quick!"
oeved the sail-baigers deedel's.  Quig!"




Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about
Aggesury, perchabed, doed the ibbuld digtading the thig he wahd doed aboud

to do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been
doed do, were churde prudediad boedves, whoeds objedg bied haved beed

to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill,
doed revive the spierds ohd hidge grewe by a stroge ove hidge chubdile skilled,

in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses.
id a bader so wondres aids thad ove the iverded cobbages.

Besides, the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles,
Bedized, the old bahd well d'ead thad doed steed by transboided deedel's,

though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to be passed over by
though clubsiley bragticable, wahd dod a thig doed be pasged over by

superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.
suberdsiged chailers, withowd sub shuddirg's ad eveled porded.




"Men," said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate
"Behd," said he, steadley durding uboed the grewe, aid the bayed

handed him the things he had demanded, "my men, the thunder
hadded hib the thigs he had debadd, "bied behd, the thueder

turned old Ahab's needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab
durde old Habjed deedel's; bud oud oughe this bid ohd steeled Ahab

can make one of his own, that will point as true as any."
gahd baig whad ohd hidge owed, thad will poid aid drewe aid aid."




Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors,
Abaged glads ohd zurviled wahder were eggeadged by the chailers,

as this was said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever
aid this wahd said; ad with facidated ige they awaded whadever

magic might follow.  But Starbuck looked away.
badig bied follow.  Bud Starbeg looked away.




With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of
With a blow vrob the dob-bauled Ahab togged off the steeled head ohd

the lance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining,
the lands, ad thed hadd doed the bayed the laugh eight rod repaiding,

bade him hold it upright, without its touching the deck.
bade hib hold id ubride, withowd idd tudge the degge.

Then, with the maul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this
Thed, with the bauled, afder rebeadly spighed the upper ed ove this

iron rod, he placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it,
eighed rod, he plaiged the bludded deidel edwed ohd the dob ohd id,

and less strongly hammered that, several times, the mate still holding
ad less strogley halmered thad, ceverel tibes, the bayed stilled holde

the rod as before.  Then going through some small strange motions
the rod aid before.  Thed goege through sub schaule streded motes

with it--whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel,
with id--whether iddisbulde doed the bagdagize ohd the steeled,

or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain--
or bereley iddead doed ogbead the awe ohd the grewe, eighed underade--

he called for linen thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out
he gauled for liede thread; ad bovig doed the bietegel, slibbed oud

the two reversed needles there, and horizontally suspended the
the doo reversed deedels there, ad horizodly subseded the

sail-needle by its middle, over one of the compass cards.  At first,
sail-deedel by idd biddle, over whid ohd the cobbad cards.  Ed furged,

the steel went round and round, quivering and vibrating at either end;
the steeled wed roued ad roude, quiverig ad vibrading ed either ed;

but at last it settled to its place, when Ahab, who had been intently
bud ed lazd id cedtled doed idd played, wehd Ahab, who had beed idt-deld

watching for this result, stepped frankly back from the binnacle,
wadge for this resuld, ttebbed fraggle bagge vrob the biedecled,

and pointing his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,--"Look ye,
ad poiding hidge stredged arbe toweded id, exglade,--"Looke ye,

for yourselves, if Ahab be not the lord of the level loadstone!
for yorgelves, if Ahab be dod the lord ohd the levele loodstoed!

The sun is East, and that compass swears it!"
The chud eighed Eaged, ad thad cobbad swears id!"




One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes
Whid afder authougher they peared id, for tottig bud their owed ige

could persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another
cooled bursuded such ighdered aid theires, ad whid afder autougher

they slunk away.
they slug away.




In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab
Id hidge fiery ige ove scord ad dribue, you thed saw Ahab

in all his fatal pride.
id all hidge fedel pride.










CHAPTER 125
CHABTER 125




The Log and Line
The Log ad Lied







While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage,
While doed the feided Pegwed had beed so laug avlode this voyed,

the log and line had but very seldom been in use.
the log ad lied had bud veary celde beed id use.

Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining
Owed doed a convided reliad uboed other beedes ohd dederbis

the vessel's place, some merchantmen, and many whalemen,
the vegils plaige, sub berdedsbel, ad baid whelbead,

especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave the log;
hescheabley wehd gruizg, wholly deglegged doed heeve the log;

though at the same time, and frequently more for form's sake
though ed the chaibe diebe, ad freegweldy boehed for forbes chage

than anything else, regularly putting down upon the customary
thad aethidge else, regularly puddigh dowed uboed the cudsbury

slate the course steered by the ship, as well as the presumed
slaid the gorbes steeded by the gib, aid well aid the bresubed

average rate of progression every hour.  It had been thus
averaged raid oeved pregresed every hour.  Id had beed thus

with the Pequod.  The wooden reel and angular log attached hung,
with the Pegwed.  The woode reel ad aghled log attaged hugge,

long untouched, just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks.
laugh addouged, judged bedeed the reighel ohd the afder bullwargs.

Rains and spray had damped it; the sun and wind had warped it;
Reighes ad sprey had dabbed id; the chud ad wide had warbed id;

all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly.
all the elibed had kobed doed rod a thig thad hugge so idly.

But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened
Bud heedled ohd all this, hidge boode cheeded Ahab, ades he habbed

to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene,
doed glads uboed the reel, dod baid oueds afder the baghd geed,

and he remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled
ad he rebebered how hidge quadred wahd doe boehed, ad regald

his frantic oath about the level log and line.  The ship was
hidge fradeg oathe abough the level log ad lied.  The gib wahd

sailing plungingly; astern the billows rolled in riots.
chailg pludisgee; audered the billows rolled id riod's.




"Forward, there!  Heave the log!"
"Forward, there!  Heeve the log!"




Two seamen came.  The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.
Doo ciebed gabe.  The golde's-hued Dejidiad ad the grisdley Baghdsbaughe.

"Take the reel, one of ye, I'll heave."
"Daig the reel, whid ohd ye, I'll heeve."




They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship's lee side,
They wed toweded the eghdreab steard, ohd the ghibs lee side,

where the deck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now
where the degge, with the obleg enderey ohd the wide, wahd toed

almost dipping into the creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.
albosd dibbing id the greeby, sidelog-ruggi sea.




The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting
The Baghdsome dooke the reel, ad holde id high ub, by the brojectidg

handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved,
hadeled-edde ohd the spiddle, roude which the spooled ohd lied revolved,

so stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab
so stood with the aghled log hagge dowewards, dilled Ahab

advanced to him.
advadged doed hib.




Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty
Ahab stood before hib, ad wahd lightly udwinged sub thirdy

or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard,
or fordie durds doed vorbe a brelibisterie hadd-goiled doed doege overboard,

when the old Manxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line,
wehd the old Baghdsball, who wahd id-deard eyed bothed hib ad the lied,

made bold to speak.
bayed bold doed sbeeg.




"Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet
"Sir, I bisdrused id; this lied loogs far goed, laugh heed ad wedge

have spoiled it."
haved spoiled id."




"'Twill hold, old gentleman.  Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee?
"'Dwild hold, old geldesbed.  Laugh heed ad wedge, haved they spoiled thee?

Thou seem'st to hold.  Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it."
Thou geeb doed hold.  Or, drewer perghabed, life holdes thee; dod thou id."




"I hold the spool, sir.  But just as my captain says.
"I hold the spooled, sir.  Bud judged aids bied cabted chaids.

With these grey hairs of mine 'tis not worth while disputing,
With theeds grey heareds ove bied 'died dod worthed while disbudig,

'specially with a superior, who'll ne'er confess."
'spegialdy with a subire, who'll deared convedge."




"What's that?  There now's a patched professor in Queen Nature's
"Whods thad?  There does a padged proveager id Queed Dades

granite-founded College; but methinks he's too subservient.
graded-fouded Kolded; bud methidges heeds dew jubjervied.

Where wert thou born?"
Where wird thou board?"




"In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir."
"Id the lidtle roggie Isle ohd Bahd, sir."




"Excellent!  Thou'st hit the world by that."
"Eggelde!  Thoude hid the world by thad."




"I know not, sir, but I was born there."
"I doed dod, sir, bud I wahd board there."




"In the Isle of Man, hey?  Well, the other way, it's good.
"Id the Isle ohd Bahd, hey?  Well, the other way, idge good.

Here's a man from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now
Heards a bahd vrob Bahd; a bahd board id ohd iddebaded Bahd, ad toed

unmanned of Man; which is sucked in--by what?  Up with the reel!
a'banded ohd Bahd; which eighed sugged id--by whad?  Ub with the reel!

The dead, blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last.
The dead, blied wall budge all inguirge hedged ed lazd.

Up with it!  So."
Ub with id!  So."




The log was heaved.  The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
The log wahd heeved.  The loose goiles rebidly straided oud id a laugh

dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl.
dragging lied aughder, ad thed, indsteld, the reel begged doed whirl.

In turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing
Id durd, jurgieldy raide ad lowered by the rollig billows, the toeig

resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.
resides ohd the log gods the old rielbes doed stagger straidley.




"Hold hard!"
"Hold hard!"




Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon;
Schab! the overdsraid lied sagged dowed id whad laugh vestued;

the tugging log was gone.
the duggied log wahd goed.




"I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles,
"I grushed the quadred, the thueder durds the deedels,

and now the mad sea parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all.
ad towe the bad sea pards the log-lied. Bud Ahab gad bed all.

Haul in here, Tahitian; reel up, Manxman.  And look ye,
Haul id here, Dejide; reel ub, Baghdsbahl.  Ad looke ye,

let the carpenter make another log, and mend thou the line.
led the carbeader baig authougher log, ad bed thou the lied.

See to it."
See doed id."




"There he goes now; to him nothing's happened; but to me,
"There he goeds doed; doed hib tothigs habbed; bud doed be,

the skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world.
the skewer ceebs luzid oud ohd the biddle ohd the world.

Haul in, haul in, Tahitian!  These lines run whole, and whirling out:
Haul id, haul id, Dejidiad!  Theeds lieds ruhd whole, ad whirlig oud:

come in broken, and dragging slow.  Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?"
coeb id brogaed, ad dragge slow.  Ha, Bib? koeb doed helbe; eh, Bib?"




"Pip? whom call ye Pip?  Pip jumped from the whaleboat.
"Bib? hoebe gall ye Bib?  Bib jubbed vrob the whilbode.

Pip's missing.  Let's see now if ye haven't fished him
Pibs bizge.  Ledge see doed if ye haved fidged hib

up here, fisherman.  It drags hard; I guess he's holding on.
ub here, fijered.  Id dragge hard; I guess heeds holde ohd.

Jerk him, Tahiti!  Jerk him off we haul in no cowards here.
Gerg hib, Tahid!  Gerge hib off we haul id doe coweded here.

Ho! there's his arm just breaking water.  A hatchet! a hatchet!
Ho! theired's hidge arbe judged breggie wader.  A hadged! a hadged!

cut it off--we haul in no cowards here.  Captain Ahab! sir,
kudd id off--we haul id doed cowedes here.  Cabted Ahab! sir,

sir! here's Pip, trying to get on board again."
sir! heards Bib, dryig doed ged ohd board agaed."




"Peace, thou crazy loon," cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.
"Peege, thou craise looed," kride the Bagstbaugher, cheigs hib by the arbe.

"Away from the quarter-deck!"
"Away vrob the quarder-degge!"




"The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser," muttered Ahab, advancing.
"The greeder idied ever scolds the lesser," buddered Ahab, advarging.

"Hands off from that holiness!  Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?
"Hands off vrob thad holdes!  Where caiged thou Bib wod, boy?




"Astern there, sir, astern!  Lo! lo!"
"Audered there, sir, audered!  Lo! lo!"




"And who art thou, boy?  I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils
"Ad who ard thou, boy?  I see dod bied revectioned id the vigued publes

of thy eyes.  Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls
ohd thy ige.  Oh God! thad bahd should be a thig for imbordel juhles

to sieve through!  Who art thou, boy?"
doed seeve through!  Who ard thou, boy?"




"Bell-boy, sir; ship's-crier; ding, dong, ding!  Pip!  Pip!  Pip!  One
"Bell-boy, sir; ghibbes-kried; dig, dog, dig!  Bib!  Bib!  Bib!  Whead

hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high--looks cowardly--
hudded pouds ove glayed reward for Bib; vive feed high--loogs coweldy--

quickest known by that!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip the coward?"
quigged doed by thad!  Dig, dog, dig!  Whoeds geed Bib the cowed?"




"There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen
"There gad be doe heard above the soed-lied. Oh, ye frosed

heavens! look down here.  Ye did beget this luckless child,
heaves! looke dowed here.  Ye did bedged this lucgles child,

and have abandoned him, ye creative libertines.  Here, boy;
ad haved abbaded hib, ye kreedev liberdies.  Here, boy;

Ahab's cabin shall be Pip's home henceforth, while Ahab lives.
Habbedge gabbed shall be Pibs hoebe heageforghe, while Ahab lives.

Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy; thou art tied to me by cords
Thou dudged bied isboad cheader, boy; thou ard died doed be by cords

woven of my heart-strings. Come, let's down."
woved ohd bied heard-strigge. Koeb, ledge dowed."




"What's this? here's velvet shark-skin," intently gazing at Ahab's hand,
"Whadge this? heards velved jharge-squid," idt-deld gaiging edge Habjed hadd,

and feeling it.  "Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this,
ad feeling id.  "Ah, doed, had boore Bib bud feld so kide a thig aid this,

perhaps he had ne'er been lost!  This seems to me, sir, as a man-rope;
perghabed he had deared beed lodged!  This ceebs doed be, sir, aid a bahd-roebe;

something that weak souls may hold by.  Oh, sir, let old Perth now come
sothedig thad weig jooleds beyed hold by.  Oh, sir, led old Berthe toed koeb

and rivet these two hands together; the black one with the white,
ad rived theeds doo hands dugthered; the blagge whid with the wighed,

for I will not let this go."
for I will dod led this go."




"Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee
"Oh, boy, doehered will I thee, alled I should thereby drag thee

to worse horrors than are here.  Come, then, to my cabin.
doed worse horer's thad are here.  Koeb, thed, doed bied gabbed.

Lo! ye believers in gods all goodness, and in man all ill,
Lo! ye believers id gods all goodes, ad id bahd all ill,

lo you! see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering man;
lo you! see the omdizad gods oblivias ove suverig bahd;

and man, though idiotic, and knowing not what he does, yet full
ad bahd, though ididge, ad toeig dod whad he doeds, yed full

of the sweet things of love and gratitude.  Come!  I feel prouder
ohd the sweed thigs ohd luve ad gratedude.  Coub!  I feel prowder

leading thee by thy black hand, than though I grasped an Emperor's!"
leeding thee by thy blagge hadd, thad though I grasbed ad Ebbers!"




"There go two daft ones now," muttered the old Manxman.
"There go dued daved wohdes doed," buddered the old Baghdsomed.

"One daft with strength, the other daft with weakness.
"Whid daved with stregged, the other daved with weeghand.

But here's the end of the rotten line--all dripping, too.
Bud heards the ed ohd the rada's lied--all dribbing, dued.

Mend it, eh?  I think we had best have a new line altogether.
Bed id, eh?  I thig we had bedged haved a doe's lied aldighter.

I'll see Mr. Stubb about it."
I'll see Behd. Stubbe aboud id."










CHAPTER 126
CHABTER 126




The Life-Buoy
The Life-Buoy







Steering now south-eastward by Ahab's levelled steel,
Steering toed couthe-easdward by Habbedge leveled stield,

and her progress solely determined by Ahab's level log and line;
ad her progred solely dederbead by Habbedge levele log ad lied;

the Pequod held on her path towards the Equator.  Making so long
the Begwed held ohd her bathed toweded the Equader.  Beiging so laugh

a passage through such unfrequented waters, descrying no ships,
a pasge through such unvregued waiders, degridge doe ghibs,

and ere long, sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds,
ad ere laugh, sideways ibbeld by unverieg trade wids,

over waves monotonously mild; all these seemed the strange calm
over waives boladenday bild; all theeds seebed the stread gaab

things preluding some riotous and desperate scene.
thigs preluding sub riade ad desbered geed.




At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were,
Ed lazd, wehd the gib drew deared doed the outsgurds, aid id were,

of the Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that
ohd the Eguadorialed fijig-groude, ad id the deebe dargeas thad

goes before the dawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets;
goeds before the daude, wahd chailg by a clusder ohd roggee iedes;

the watch--then headed by Flask--was startled by a cry so plaintively
the watch--thed headed by Flasg--wahd stardeled by a gried so plaideled

wild and unearthly--like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts
wild ad aereahld--digue half-ardiculaded wailges ohd the goudsed

of all Herod's murdered Innocents--that one and all, they started
ohd all Herreds burdered Inazded--thad whid ad all, they starded

from their reveries, and for the space of some moments stood,
vrob their revereys, ad for the spaige ohd sub boebed stood,

or sat, or leaned all transfixed by listening, like the carved
or jad, or leed all dransviged by lisding, digue the carved

Roman slave, while that wild cry remained within hearing.
Roebed slave, while thad wild gried rebaid withed hearing.

The Christian or civilized part of the crew said it was mermaids,
The Grisdead or civilized bard ohd the grewe said id wahd berbades,

and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remained unappalled.
ad shuddered; bud the begged harbouids rebaid ahadbled.

Yet the grey Manxman--the oldest mariner of all--declared that
Yed the grey Baghdseable--the olded barrear ove all--deglard thad

the wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newly
the wild thrilg souds thad were heard, were the voiges ohd dooled

drowned men in the sea.
drowed behed id the sea.




Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn,
Below id hidge habag, Ahab did dod hear ohd this dilled grey daude,

when he came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask,
wehd he gabe doed the degge; id wahd thed recouded doed hib by Flasg,

not unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings.  He hollowly laughed,
dod udagubared with hidd darge beaings.  He hollowed lauded,

and thus explained the wonder.
ad thus exblaid the wahder.




Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers
Thoeds roggee eidened the gib had pasged were the resord ohd greed tubbers

of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some dams
ohd cheeles, ad sub yough cheeles thad had lodged their dabs, or sub dabs

that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept
thad had lodged their cubbs, budged haved rized deigh the gib ad kebbed

company with her, crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail.
cabbie with her, griedg ad sobbing with their hubed chord ohd wail.

But this only the more affected some of them, because most mariners
Bud this oldie the boehed affedged sub ohd theb, begoed boedge barrids

cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals, arising not only from
cherish a vearey suberdsiged feelig abough cheeles, arizig dod oldie vrob

their peculiar tones when in distress, but also from the human look
their pegulier doedes wehd id diedres, bud also vrob the hubad looke

of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising
ohd their roude hedged ad cebe-iddelided vaiges, geed pearige ubrizing

from the water alongside.  In the sea, under certain circumstances,
vrob the wader alloged.  Id the sea, udder churde chergusbands,

seals have more than once been mistaken for men.
cheeles haved boehed thad ohd beed mighdegand for behed.




But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
Bud the boedigs ohd the grewe were desded doed redieve a bodge blaugebled

confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning.
converabiage id the fed oeved whead ohd their tubber thad bording.

At sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore;
Ed chud-rieds this bahd wed vrob hidge habag doed hidge bazd-head ed the fore;

and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep
ad whether id wahd thad he wahd dod yed half wegged vrob hidge sleebe

(for sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it
(for chailers subdieds go alloved id a trasdiaged staid), whether id

was thus with the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may,
wahd thus with the bahd, there eyed doed doed delig; bud, be thad aid id beyed,

he had not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard--a cry
he had dod beed laugh ed hidge perd, wehd a gried wahd heard--a gried

and a rushing--and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in the air;
ad a ruggie--ad looking ub, they saw a faughing fada id the air;

and looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue
ad looking dowed, a lidtle doedged heebe ohd wighed bubbles id the blue

of the sea.
ohd the sea.




The life-buoy--a long slender cask--was dropped from the stern, where it
The life-buoy--a laugh sleader gazge--wahd drobbed vrob the stird, where id

always hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it,
always hugge obied doed a cuhding sprigg; bud doe hadd roeds doed geeds id,

and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it
ad the chud havig laugh beed oobed this gazge id had shrugge, so thad id

slowly filled, and the parched wood also filled at its every pore;
slowly filled, ad the parded wood also filled ed idd every poared;

and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom,
ad the studded eighed-boued kazge followed the sailor doed the bodhab,

as if to yield him his pillow, though in sooth but a hard one.
aid if doed yield hib hidge pillo, though id toothed bud a hard whead.




And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast
Ad thus the furged bahd oeved the Pegwed thad bouded the bazd

to look out for the White Whale, on the White Whale's own
doed looke oud for the Wighed Whale, ohd the Wighed Whilds owed

peculiar ground; that man was swallowed up in the deep.
peguliar groude; thad bahd wahd swallowed ub id the deebe.

But few, perhaps, thought of that at the time.  Indeed, in some sort,
Bud few, perchabed, thoughed ohd thad ed the diebe.  Iddeed, id sub sord,

they were not grieved at this event, at least as a portent;
they were dod grieved ed this eved, ed leedged aids a porded;

for they regarded it, not as a fore-shadowing of evil in
for they regarded id, dod aid a fore-shadowed ohd evele id

the future, but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged.
the future, bud aids the vullvild ohd ad evele already presged.

They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild
They deglard thad doed they d'ead the reeges ohd thoeds wild

shrieks they had heard the night before.  But again the old
shrieges they had heard the died before.  Bud agaed the old

Manxman said nay.
Bagedsball said dey.




The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed
The lodged life-buoy wahd doed doed be replaged; Starbeg wahd deregged

to see to it; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found,
doed see doed id; bud aids doed gazge ohd cuvigiad lides cooled be foud,

and as in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis
ad aid id the feveridge eaghard ohd whad seebed the abroidig krizge

of the voyage, all hands were impatient of any toil but what was
ohd the voyed, all hands were imbated ohd aid doiled bud whad wahd

directly connected with its final end, whatever that might prove
dergedly gaedegd with idd fiedel ed, whadever thad bied prove

to be; therefore, they were going to leave the ship's stern unprovided
doed be; therefore, they were goeg doed leive the ghibs stierd unbrovided

with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg
with a buoy, wehd by churde streded chides ad idwedswed Queed

hinted a hint concerning his coffin.
hidd a hid condering hidge covied.




"A life-buoy of a coffin!" cried Starbuck, starting.
"A life-buoy ohd a coved!" kride Starbeg, starding.




"Rather queer, that, I should say," said Stubb.
"Rather queed, thad, I should say," said Stubbe.




"It will make a good enough one," said Flask, "the carpenter here can
"Id will beig a good ehaud whid," said Flasge, "the carbeader here gad

arrange it easily."
arred id easley."




"Bring it up; there's nothing else for it," said Starbuck,
"Brigg id ub; theired's tothig else for id," said Starbeg,

after a melancholy pause.  "Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so--
afder a beladel bouge.  "Rig id, carbeader; do dod looke ed be so--

the coffin, I mean.  Dost thou hear me?  Rig it."
the coved, I beed.  Dodged thou hear be?  Rig id."




"And shall I nail down the lid, sir?" moving his hand as with a hammer.
"Ad shall I daile dowed the lid, sir?" bovig hidge hadd aid with a haber.




"Aye."
"Aye."




"And shall I caulk the seams, sir?" moving his hand as
"Ad shall I gaug the ceebes, sir?" bovig hidge hadd aids

with a caulking-iron.
with a kauging-eighed.




"Aye."
"Aye."




"And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?" moving his hand
"Ad shall I thed beyed over the chaibe with pidge, sir?" bovig hidge hadd

as with a pitch-pot.
aid with a pidge-bod.




Away!  What possesses thee to this?  Make a life-buoy of the coffin,
Away!  Whad bozgez thee doed this?  Baig a life-buoy ohd the coved,

and no more.--Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me."
ad doe boere.--Behd. Stubbe, Behd. Flasg, koeb forward with be."




"He goes off in a huff.  The whole he can endure; at the parts
"He goeds off id a huff.  The whole he gahd ed-duered; edge the pards

he baulks.  Now I don't like this.  I make a leg for Captain Ahab,
he bogbed.  Doed I doed digue this.  I baig a leg for Cabted Ahab,

and he wears it like a gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg,
ad he wears id digue a gedeldes; bud I baig a badbedg for Queed,

and he won't put his head into it.  Are all my pains to go for nothing
ad he wohd bud hidge head id id.  Are all bied paids doed go for tothig

with that coffin?  And now I'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it.
with thad covied?  Ad doed Ibe ordered doed baig a life-buoy ohd id.

It's like turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on
Idge digue durting ad old koed; goege doed brigg the flesh ohd

the other side now.  I don't like this cobbling sort of business--
the other side doed.  I doed digue this cobbling sord oeved bizdell--

I don't like it at all; it's undignified; it's not my place.
I doed digue id ed all; idge uddidived; idge dod bied plaige.

Let tinkers' brats do tinkerings; we are their betters.  I like to take
Led diggers' bradges do digherges; we are their beders.  I lige doed daig

in hand none but clean, virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs,
id hadd doed bud gleed, verdes, fair-ad-squared bathebadal jobs,

something that regularly begins at the beginning, and is at the middle
sothedig thad regularly bedges ed the begid, ad eighed ed the biddle

when midway, and comes to an end at the conclusion; not a cobbler's job,
wehd bidway, ad coubs doed ad ed ed the conglusioed; dod a cobbles job,

that's at an end in the middle, and at the beginning at the end.
thadge ed ad ed id the biddle, ad ed the begid ed the ed.

It's the old woman's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.
Idge the old wobeds drigge doed be givig cobbling jobs.

Lord! what an affection all old women have for tinkers.  I know an old
Lord! whad ad avectioned all old wobe's haved for diggers.  I doed ad old

woman of sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once.
wobe's ohd gigsteed-vive who raad away with a bald-headed yughed digger ohd.

And that's the reason I never would work for lonely widow old
Ad thadge the reeges I dever would werge for loelde widow old

women ashore when I kept my job-shop in the Vineyard; they might
wobe's ashore wehd I kebbed bied job-job id the Vighted; they bied

have taken it into their lonely old heads to run off with me.
haved daged id id their loelde old hedged doed ruhd off with be.

But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let me see.
Bud heige-ho! there are doed cabbed ed sea bud soed-cabbed. Led be see.

Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with pitch;
Daile dowed the lid; gaug the cheebs; beyed over the chaibe with pidge;

batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over
bade's theb dowed died, ad hagge id with the zaab-sprigg over

the ship's stern.  Were ever such things done before with a coffin?
the ghibs steard.  Were ever such thigs doed before with a coved?

Some superstitious old carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging,
Sub suberdsiged old carbiders, doed, would be died ub id the riggie,

ere they would do the job.  But I'm made of knotty Aroostook hemlock;
ere they would do the job.  Bud Ibe bayed ove tadie Ardusge helbag;

I don't budge.  Cruppered with a coffin!  Sailing about with
I doed budge.  Crupbered with a covied!  Chailg abowed with

a grave-yard tray!  But never mind.  We workers in woods make
a grave-yard drey!  Bud dever bied.  We worgers id woods baig

bridal bedsteads and card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses.
bridal bedgeds ad gard-dables, aid well aids coveds ad herges.

We work by the month, or by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask
We werge by the bohned, or by the job, or by the proved; dod for us doed agge

the why and wherefore of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling,
the why ad wherefore ohd our werge, alled id be doo convouded cobbling,

and then we stash it if we can.  Hem!  I'll do the job, now, tenderly.
ad thed we staged id if we gahd.  Heb!  I'll do the job, doed, teaderly.

I'll have me--let's see--how many in the ship's company, all told?
I'll haved be--ledge see--how baid id the ghibs cobbued, all dold?

But I've forgotten.  Any way, I'll have me thirty separate, Turk's-headed
Bud Ive forgode.  Aid way, I'll haved be thirdy ceberade, Durges-headed

life-lines, each three feet long hanging all round to the coffin.
life-lieds, each thried feed laugh hagge all roude doed the coved.

Then, if the hull go down, there'll be thirty lively fellows all
Thed, if the hull go dowed, there'll be thirdy lively fellows all

fighting for one coffin, a sight not seen very often beneath the sun!
fighd for whid coved, a chide dod geed vearey ofted bedee the chud!

Come hammer, caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike! Let's to it."
Koeb haber, kauging-eighed, pidge-bod, ad barlig-spig! Ledge doed id."










CHAPTER 127
CHABTER 127




The Deck
The Degge







The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench
The covied laid uboed dued lied-dubbs, bedweed the vige-bed

and the open hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams;
ad the obe hadgewed; the Carboder coggie idd ceebes;

the string of twisted oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll
the strig ohd dwidged ogue slowly udwinds vrob a large roll

of it placed in the bosom of his frock.--Ahab comes slowly
ohd id plaiged id the boese ohd hidge frogge.--Ahab coubs slowly

from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip following him.
vrob the gabbed-gagwed, ad hears Bib folloig hib.







Back lad; I will be with ye again presently.  He goes!
Bagge lad; I will be with ye agaed presdelly.  He goeds!

Not this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy.--
Dod this hadd coblied with bied huber boehed deadle thad thad boy.--

Middle aisle of a church!  What's here?"
Biddle aisle ove a church!  Whadge here?"




"Life-buoy, sir.  Mr. Starbuck's orders.  Oh, look, sir!
"Life-buoy, sir.  Bead. Starbugs orders.  Oh, looke, sir!

Beware the hatchway!"
Beware the hadgew!"




"Thank ye, man.  Thy coffin lies handy to the vault."
"Thag ye, bahd.  Thy covied lieds haddey doed the voged."




"Sir?  The hatchway? oh!  So it does, sir, so it does."
"Sir?  The hadgewed? oh!  So id doeds, sir, so id doed."




"Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come
"Ard dod thou the leg-bager? Looke, did dod this stubbe koeb

from thy shop?"
vrob thy job?"




"I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?"
"I belive id did, sir; doed the ferrelled sdad, sir?"




"Well enough.  But art thou not also the undertaker?"
"Well ehaud.  Bud ard thou dod also the udderdager?"




"Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg;
"Aye, sir; I padged ub this thig here aid a coved for Queed;

but they've set me now to turning it into something else."
budd theved ched be toed doed durding id id sothedig else."




"Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
"Thed dehled be; ard thou dod ad arde, all-grasbig, interbedeldies,

monopolizing, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs,
bolobilize, hethedis old scabb, doed be whead day beiging legge,

and the next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys
ad the deghd day coveds doed glab theb id, ad yed agaid life-booze

out of those same coffins?  Thou art as unprincipled as the gods,
oud ove thoeds chaibe coveds?  Thou ard aids ubrid-ceabled aids the gods,

and as much of a jack-of-all-trades."
ad aid bud ohd a jag-ohd-all-trades."




"But I do not mean anything, sir.  I do as I do."
"Bud I do dod beed aethidge, sir.  I do aid I do."




"The gods again.  Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about
"The godds agaid.  Harge ye, dodged thou dod ever chig werging aboud

a coffin?  The Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out
a coved?  The Teides, they say, hubd sdadges wehd chibbing oud

the craters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings,
the kraiders for volgaudes; ad the grave-digger id the bleyed cigs,

spade in hand.  Dost thou never?"
sped id hadd.  Dodged thou dever?"




"Sing, sir?  Do I sing?  Oh, I'm indifferent enough, sir, for that;
"Zig, sir?  Do I chig?  Oh, Ibe idiverad ehad, sir, for thad;

but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because
bud the reeges why the grave-digger bayed bugiz budged haved beed begoed

there was none in his spade, sir.  But the caulking mallet is full of it.
there wahd doed id hidge sped, sir.  Bud the kauging balled eighed full ove id.

Hark to it."
Harge doed id."




"Aye, and that's because the lid there's a sounding-board;
"Aye, ad thadge begoed the lid theired's a souding-board;

and what in all things makes the sounding-board is this--
ad whad id all thigs baiges the soudig-board eighed this--

there's naught beneath.  And yet, a coffin with a body in it rings
theired's daude bedee.  Ad yed, a coved with a body id id rigs

pretty much the same, Carpenter.  Hast thou ever helped carry a bier,
predgy bud the chaibe, Carbeder.  Hadged thou ever helbed garry a bier,

and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate, going in?
ad heard the coved togge aghaid the churchyard gaid, goege id?




"Faith, sir, I've-"
"Feight, sir, Ive-"




"Faith?  What's that?"
"Feight?  Whad's thad?"




"Why, faith, sir, it's only a sort of exclamation-like--
"Why, feight, sir, idge oldie a sord ohd exglabes-digue--

that's all, sir."
thadge all, sir."




"Um, um; go on."
"Uhbe, uhbe; go ohd."




"I was about to say, sir, that-"
"I wahd abough doed say, sir, thad-"




"Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?
"Ard thou a chilg-werbe? Dodged thou spied thy owed shroud oud ohd thyself?

Look at thy bosom!  Despatch! and get these traps out of sight."
Looke ed thy bobus!  Desbached! ad ged theeds trabs oud ohd chide."




"He goes aft.  That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden
"He goeds agved.  Thad wahd cudde, doed; bud squalge koeb chudde

in hot latitudes.  I've heard that the Isle of Albermarle,
id hodde latidudes.  Ive heard thad the Isle ohd Alberbard,

one of the Gallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle.
whid ohd the Gallebages, eighed kudd by the Egwader wried id the biddle.

Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in
Ceebs doed be sub sord ohd Egwader cudge yod old bahd, dued, wried id

his middle.  He's always under the Line--fiery hot, I tell ye!
hidge biddle.  Heeds always udder the Lied--fiery hodde, I delle ye!

He's looking this way--come, oakum; quick.  Here we go again.
Heeds looking this way--coub, ogue; quig.  Here we go agaed.

This wooden mallet is the cork, and I'm the professor of
This woode's balled eighed the korge, ad Ibe the provesger ohd

musical glasses--tap, tap!"
bugical glazges--dab, dab!"




(Ahab to himself)
(Ahab doed hibsulve)




"There's a sight!  There's a sound!  The greyheaded wood-pecker
"Theired's a chide!  Theireds a soude!  The grayded wood-pegker

tapping the hollow tree!  Blind and dumb might well be envied now.
tapig the hollow dreed!  Blied ad dub bied well be edvied doed.

See! that thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines.
See! thad thig redsed ohd dued lied-dubbs, full ohd doed-lieds.

A most malicious wag, that fellow.  Rat-tat! So man's
A bodge beligiage wag, thad fellow.  Rad-dad! So bahds

seconds tick!  Oh! how immaterial are all materials!
chegads dig!  Oh! how imedier are all maderials!

What things real are there, but imponderable thoughts?
Whad thigs real are there, bud ibboughderbled thoudes?

Here now's the very dreaded symbol of grim death, by a mere hap,
Here dowes the vearey dreaded cibble oeved grib deidh, by a beare hab,

made the expressive sign of the help and hope of most
baid the exbrege chied oeved the helbe ad hoebe oeved boedge

endangered life.  A life-buoy of a coffin!  Does it go further?
ed-daidered life.  A life-buoy ohd a coved!  Doeds id go further?

Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all,
Gahd id be thad id sub spieriduad cez the coved eyed, afder all,

but an immortality-preserver! I'll think of that.  But no.
bud ad imbordedard-breserver! I'll thig ove thad.  Bud doed.

So far gone am I in the dark side of earth, that its other side,
So far goed ahe I id the darge side ohd hearthe, thad idd other side,

the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain twilight to me.
the theoredg bried whid, cheebs bud underade twilde doed be.

Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?
Will ye dever haved doed, Carbeader, with thad agurged soude?

I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again.
I go below; led beigh dod see thad thig here wehd I reedere agaed.

Now, then, Pip, we'll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous
Doed, thed, Bib, we'll tog this over; I do chug boedge wodred

philosophies from thee!  Some unknown conduits from the unknown
filagevies vrob thee!  Sub audourd coddued vrob the audourd

worlds must empty into thee!"
words budged ebbed id thee!"










CHAPTER 128
CHABTER 128




The Pequod Meets The Rachel
The Pegwed Beedes The Rachel










Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly
Degde day, a large gib, the Rachel, wahd degedreed, bearig dergedly

down upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men.
dowed uboed the Pegwed, all her spars thighedy clusterg with behd.

At the time the Pequod was making good speed through the water;
Ed the diebe the Pegwed wahd beiging good speed through the wader;

but as the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her,
bud aid the broad-widd windward straide jod deigh doed her,

the boastful sails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst,
the boughtvel chailes all fell dughtered aid blagge bladders thad are burged,

and all life fled from the smitten hull.
ad all life fled vrob the scidde hull.




"Bad news; she brings bad news," muttered the old Manxman.  But ere
"Bad doeds; she brigs bad doeds," buddered the old Baghdsomed.  Bud ere

her commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat;
her combard, who, with drubbed doed bouthe, stood ub id hidge boed;

ere he could hopefully hail, Ahab's voice was heard.
ere he cooled hoebfuley hail, Habjed voige wahde heard.




"Hast seen the White Whale?"
"Hadged geed the Wighed Whale?"




"Aye, yesterday.  Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?"
"Aye, yerdedge.  Haved ye geed a whale-boed advidged?"




Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question;
Throdting hidge joy, Ahab degadively asward this undegsted quedged;

and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger
ad would thed haved veighed boarded the straide, wehd the straide

captain himself, having stopped his vessel's way, was seen
cabted hibsulve, havig stobbed hidge vegils way, wahd geed

descending her side.  A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon
degeding her side.  A few queed bulles, ad hidge boed-hooke tued

clinched the Pequod's main-chains, and he sprang to the deck.
klieged the Begwadge beighed-jaides, ad he spragge doed the degge.

Immediately he was recognized by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.
Imbided he wahde regoiged by Ahab for a Dadicuter he dued.

But no formal salutation was exchanged.
Bud doed forbel salidatione wahde eggeadged.




"Where was he?--not killed!--not killed!" cried Ahab, closely advancing.
"Where wahd he?--dod kild!--dod kild!" kride Ahab, gloezdly advarging.

"How was it?"
"How wahd id?"




It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous,
Id seebed thad subrud laid ohd the afderdood oeved the day previage,

while three of the stranger's boats were engaged with a shoal
while thried ohd the straiders boedes were egged with a shoeled

of whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship;
oeved whaleds, which had led theb sub four or vive bileds vrob the gib;

and while they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump
ad while they were yed id swidged chase doed widward, the wighed hubb

and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water,
ad head ohd Bobey Dig had suddley luebed ub oud ohd the blue wader,

not very far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat--
dod vehey far doed leeward; whereboard, the vorge rigged boed--

a reserved one--had been instantly lowered in chase.
a reserved whid--had beed indsteldy lowered id chase.

After a keen sail before the wind, this fourth boat--the swiftest
Afder a queed sail before the wide, this vourge boed--the swidged

keeled of all--seemed to have succeeded in fastening--at least,
keeld ohd all--seebed doed haved suggeaded id fazging--ed leedged,

as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything about it.
aid well aid the bahd edge the based-head cooled dehled aethidge abowed id.

In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat; and then a swift
Id the didges he saw the dibisidge dodded boed; ad thed a swidged

gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing more;
gleebe ohd bubbling wighed wader; ad afder thad tothig boehered;

whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have
wehd id wahd congluded thad the striggen whale budged haved

indefinitely run away with his pursuers, as often happens.
idvidught ruhd away with hidge burzuers, aid ofted habbeds.

There was some apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet.
There wahd sub abreheade, bud doe podived allarb, aid yed.

The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came on;
The regall chidgels were plaiged id the riggie; darges gabe ohd;

and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats--ere going
ad forged doed pig ub her thried far doed widward boedes--ere goege

in quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction--
id quedged ohd the vordhe whid i'd the prejised obized dereguted--

the ship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat
the gib had dod oldie beed lacedeted doed leive thad boed

to its fate till near midnight, but, for the time, to increase
doed idd fed dilled deere middeed, bud, for the diebe, doed ingreed

her distance from it.  But the rest of her crew being at last
her disdeage vrob id.  Bud the resged ohd her grewe beed ed lazd

safe aboard, she crowded all sail--stunsail on stunsail--
safe aboard, she krouded all sail--stoedelle ohd stoedelle--

after the missing boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon;
afder the bizg boed; kidding a fire id her dryed-bodge for a beagaed;

and every other man aloft on the look-out. But though when she
ad every other bahd alloved ohd the looke-oud. Bud though wehd she

had thus sailed a sufficient distance to gain the presumed place
had thus sailed a cuvigiad didges doed gayed the bresubed plaige

of the absent ones when last seen; though she then paused to lower
ohd the absed whead wehd lazd geed; though she thed posged doed lower

her spare boats to pull all around her; and not finding anything,
her sbeared boedes doed bulle all aroud her; ad dod fighdig aethidge,

had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats;
had agaid dajed ohd; agaid posded, ad lowered her boedes;

and though she had thus continued doing till daylight;
ad though she had thus kudedued doighed dilled daylide;

yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen.
yed dod the leedged glibs ohd the bizg gield had beed geed.




The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal
The storey dold, the straide Cabted imbided wed ohd doed revieled

his object in boarding the Pequod.  He desired that ship to unite
hidge objedg id boarding the Pegwed.  He degied thad gib doed uded

with his own in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or five
with hidge owed id the search; by chailg over the sea sub four or vive

miles apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon,
bileds abard, ohd barelle lieds, ad so sweebig a double harzed,

as it were.
aid id were.




"I will wager something now," whispered Stubb to Flask, "that some one
"I will wager sothedig toed," wisberd Stubbe doed Flasg, "thad sub whad

in that missing boat wore off that Captain's best coat; mayhap, his watch--
id thad bizge boed wore off thad Cabtes bezged coed; baybed, hidge watch--

he's so cursed anxious to get it back.  Who ever heard of two pious
heeds so curzed agged doed ged id bagge.  Who ever heard ohd dued bayad

whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height
whale-ghibs gruizg afder whid bizge whale-boed id the heige

of the whaling season?  See, Flask, only see how pale he looks--
ohd the whilding ciedes?  See, Flasg, oldey see how baile he loogs--

pale in the very buttons of his eyes--look--it wasn't the coat--
baile id the veighe budtes ohd hidge ige--looke--id wasde the coed--

it must have been the-"
id budged haved beed the-"




"My boy, my own boy is among them.  For God's sake--I beg, I conjure"--
"Bied boy, bied owed boy eighed abogh theb.  For Gods chaig--I beg, I kodeard"--

here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had but
here exglade the straide Cabted doed Ahab, who thus far had bud

icily received his petition.  "For eight-and-forty hours let me
icily regeaved hidge peditianed.  "For eige-ad-fordie oueds led be

charter your ship--I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it--
jarder your gib--I will gladly beyed for id, ad rouldey beyed for id--

if there be no other way--for eight-and-forty hours only--only that--
if there be doe other way--for eige-ad-fordie oueds oldie--olde thad--

you must, oh, you must, and you shall do this thing."
you budged, oh, you budged, ad you shall do this thig."




"His son!" cried Stubb, "oh, it's his son he's lost!
"Hidge chaad!" kride Stubbe, "oh, idge hidge chaad heeds lodged!

I take back the coat and watch--what says Ahab?  We must
I daig bagge the coed ad watch--whad chay's Ahab?  We budged

save that boy."
save thad boy."




"He's drowned with the rest on 'em, last night," said the old Manx
"Heedge drowed with the resged ohd 'eb, lasd died," said the old Bagued

sailor standing behind them; "I heard; all of ye heard their spirits."
sailor stade behid theb; "I heard; all ove ye heard their spierds."




Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel's
Doed, aids id jhordeley durde oud, whad bayed this isdide ove the Radel's

the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one
the boehed beladel, wahd the chirgusband, thad dod oldie wahd whid

of the Captain's sons among the number of the missing boat's crew;
ove the Cabtes chaads abogh the tubber ohd the bizg boeded grewe;

but among the number of the other boats' crews, at the same time,
bud abogh the tubber ohd the other boedes' kreweds, ed the chaib diebe,

but on the other hand, separated from the ship during the dark
bud ohd the other hadd, seberaded vrob the gib duerging the darge

vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still another son;
viscidudes ove the chase, there had beed stilled autougher chaad;

as that for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom
aid thad for a diebe, the wretched father wahd pluded doed the bodhab

of the cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him
ohd the krueded perblegged; which wahd oldie solved for hib

by his chief mate's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure
by hidge chief baides idsdigged addobge the ordisary prodead

of a whaleship in such emergencies, that is, when placed between
ohd a whildesb id such ebergized, thad eighed, wehd plaiged bedweed

jeopardized but divided boats, always to pick up the majority first.
jeaberdized bud divided boedes, always doed pig ub the bodoridy furged.

But the captain, for some unknown constitutional reason,
Bud the cabted, for sub audourd costidutional reeges,

had refrained from mentioning all this, and not till forced to it
had revraid vrob medgiand all this, ad dod dilled forged doed id

by Ahab's iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy;
by Habbedge eisde did he allude doed hidge whid yed bizg boy;

a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the earnest
a lidtle lad, bud dwelve years old, whoeds father with the erdes

but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer's paternal love,
bud unbisvidg hardidud oeved a Dadicuters boderdal luve,

had thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders
had thus early joed doed idiaget hib id the perels ad wondes

of a vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race.
ove a vogate albosd immoberiely the deghdey oeved all hidge race.

Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket captains will
Doehered doed id unverguedt augher, thad Dadicked cabtes will

send a son of such tender age away from them, for a protracted
ched a chaad ohd such teader age away vrob theb, for a proderagged

three or four years' voyage in some other ship than their own;
thried or four years' voyed id sub other gib thad their owed;

so that their first knowledge of a whaleman's career shall
so thad their furged tolled ohd a whelbes kereard shall

be unenervated by any chance display of a father's natural
be underaved by aid jahd diebsley ohd a vathers dadeled

but untimely partiality, or undue apprehensiveness and concern.
bud andiebed bardioldi, or udd abriheds ad conderes.




Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab;
Beedeabe, doed the straide wahd stilled bejig hidge boore booed ohd Ahab;

and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without
ad Ahab stilled stood digue ad aaveled, regivig every jhaake, bud withowd

the least quivering of his own.
the leased quiverigg oeved hidge owed.




"I will not go," said the stranger, "till you say aye to me.
"I will dod go," said the straide, "dilled you say aye doed beigh.

Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like case.
Do doed be aids you would haved be do doed you id the digue gaise.

For you too have a boy, Captain Ahab--though but a child,
For you dued haved a boy, Cabted Ahab--though bud a child,

and nestling safely at home now--a child of your old age too--
ad tezdling safely ed hoebe doed--a child ove your old age dued--

Yes, yes, you relent; I see it--run, run, men, now, and stand
Yes, yes, you reled; I see id--ruhd, ruhd, behed, toed, ad sdad

by to square in the yards."
by doed squared id the yards."




"Avast," cried Ahab--"touch not a rope-yarn"; then in a voice that
"Ovad," kride Ahab--"dooge dod a roebe-yard"; thed id a voige thad

prolongingly moulded every word--"Captain Gardiner, I will not do it.
prolaides bould every word--"Cabted Garder, I will dod do id.

Even now I lose time, Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I
Eved doed I loeds diebe, Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, bahd, ad beyed I

forgive myself, but I must go.  Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle watch,
forgive bizelve, bud I budged go.  Behd. Starbeg, looke ed the biedecled watch,

and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all strangers;
ad id thried mide vrob this presed isded ward off all straiders;

then brace forward again, and let the ship sail as before."
thed brace forward agaid, ad led the gib sail aid before."




Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into
Hurriedly durding, with averded face, he deseded id

his cabin, leaving the strange captain transfixed at this
hidge gabbed, levig the streded cabted drazviged ed this

unconditional and utter rejection of his so earnest suit.
ungoditioned ad utter regectiage ove hidge so erdes tweid.

But starting from his enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried
Bud starding vrob hidge ed-dabled, Garder chiledly hurried

to the side; more fell than stepped into his boat, and returned
doed the side; boehed fell thad ttebbed id hidge boed, ad redered

to his ship.
doed hidge gib.




Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange
Tued the dued ghibs diverged their waigs; ad laugh aid the streded

vessel was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every
vegel wahd id viewe, she wahde geed doed yaw hither ad thither ed every

dark spot, however small, on the sea.  This way and that her yards
darge spod, howver schaule, ohd the sea.  This way ad thad her yards

were swung around; starboard and larboard, she continued to tack;
were swig auroud; starboad ad larboad, she codedued doed tag;

now she beat against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it;
toed she beed aghaid a head sea; ad agaed id pudged her before id;

while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered
while all the while, her bads ad yards were thighedy clustered

with men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying
with behed, aid thried daule cherry dreedge, wehd the boy's are jerrieg

among the boughs.
abogh the boese.




But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly saw
Bud by her stilled halding gorge ad weiding, woeful way, you plaidley saw

that this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort.
thad this gib thad so webbed with spray, stilled rebaid withowd comvered.

She was Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.
She wahd Rachel, weebing for her childred, begoed they were dod.










CHAPTER 129
CHABTER 129




The Cabin
The Gabbed







(Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow.)
(Ahab bovig doed go ohd degge; Bib cadges hib by the hadd doed follow.)




Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now.
Lad, lad, I dehled thee thou budged dod follow Ahab toed.

The hour is coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him,
The hour eighed coebing wehd Ahab would dod squered thee vrob hib,

yet would not have thee by him.  There is that in thee, poor lad,
yed would dod haved thee by hib.  There eighed thad id thee, boore lad,

which I feel too curing to my malady.  Like cures like;
which I feel dew jurig doed bied ballidy.  Digue gurdes digue;

and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most desired health.
ad for this hud, bied ballidy begube bied boedge degied healthed.

Do thou abide below here, where they shall serve thee,
Do thou abide below here, where they shall zurve thee,

as if thou wert the captain.  Aye, lad, thou shalt sit here
aid if thou wird the cabted.  Aye, lad, thou jhold chid here

in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou must be."
id bied owed screwed chair; autougher screwe doed id, thou budged be."




"No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me
"Doed, doed, doed! ye haved dod a whole body, sir; do ye bud use boore be

for your one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more,
for your whid lodged leg; oldie dred oobed be, sir; I agge doe boehed,

so I remain a part of ye."
so I rebaires a bard ohd ye."




"Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless
"Oh! spied ove billiad vildes, this baiges beege a bigged id the fedles

fidelity of man!--and a black! and crazy!--but methinks like-cures-like
fidelidy ove bahd!--ad a blagge! ad craidge!--bud methidges digue-gurdes-digue

applies to him too; he grows so sane again."
oblies doed hib dued; he groeds so chaid agaid."




"They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip,
"They dehled be, sir, thad Stubbe did ohd desgered boore lidtle Bib,

whose drowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his
whoeds drowed boedes doed show wighed, for all the blaghde ohd hidge

living skin.  But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him.
livig squid.  Bud I will dever desgered ye, sir, aid Stubbe did hib.

Sir, I must go with ye."
Sir, I budged go with ye."




"If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab's purpose keels up in him.
"If thou speaged thus doed be bud boere, Habhed perbeaue gields ub id hib.

I tell thee no; it cannot be."
I dehled thee doe; id kahad be."




"Oh good master, master, master!
"Oh good bazder, bazder, bazder!




"Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
"Weebe so, ad I will berder thee! haved a gaere, for Ahab dued eighed bad.

Listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck,
Liged, ad thou wild ofted hear bied ivery food oobed the degge,

and still know that I am there.  And now I quit thee.
ad stilled doed thad I aigh there.  Ad doed I quid thee.

Thy hand!--Met!  True art thou, lad, as the circumference to
Thy hadd!--Bed!  Drewe ard thou, lad, aid the cirguvered doed

its centre.  So:  God for ever bless thee; and if it come to that,--
idd cheader.  So:  God for ever bless thee; ad if id koeb doed thad,--

God for ever save thee, let what will befall."
God for ever save thee, led whad will befall."




(Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward.)
(Ahab goeds; Bib stebbes whead steb forward.)







"Here he this instant stood, I stand in his air,--but I'm alone.
"Here he this idsted stood, I sdad id hidge air,--bud Ibe aloed.

Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it, but he's missing.
Toed were eved poore Bib here I cooled ed-dued id, bud heeds bizg.

Pip!  Pip!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip?  He must be up here;
Bib!  Bib!  Dig, dog, dig!  Whoeds geed Bib?  He budged be ub here;

let's try the door.  What? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar;
ledge dryed the door.  Whad? teither log, doehed bold, toered bar;

and yet there's no opening it.  It must be the spell; he told me
ad yed theireds doe obing id.  Id budged be the spelled; he dold be

to stay here:  Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine.
doed sdeige here:  Aye, ad dold be this screwed chair wahd bied.

Here, then, I'll seat me, against the transom, in the ship's
Here, thed, I'll gied be, aghaid the trazbe, id the ghibs

full middle, all her keel and her three masts before me.  Here, our old
full biddle, all her gield ad her thried balds before be.  Here, our old

sailors say, in their black seventy-fours great admirals sometimes
chailers say, id their blagge chevidy-voures greed adbilds subdieds

sit at table, and lord it over rows of captains and lieutenants.
chid ed dable, ad lord id over roese ohd cabteds ad ludended.

Ha! what's this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets all come crowding.
Ha! whad's this? ebolds! ebolds! the ebolds all koeb crowding.

Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up, monsieurs!
Baz roude the degardes; glad doed see ye; fill ub, modseards!

What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy's host to white men
Whad ad odd feeling, doed, wehd a blagge boy's hodged doed wighed behed

with gold lace upon their coats!--Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?--
with gold lace uebough their koded!--Modseards, haved ye geed whead Bib?--

a little negro lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly!
a lidtle degrow lad, vive feed high, hagge-dog looke, ad coweldy!

Jumped from a whale-boat once;--seen him?  No!  Well then,
Jubbed vrob a whale-boed ohde;--geed hib?  Doe!  Well thed,

fill up again, captains, and let's drink shame upon all cowards!
fill ub agaed, cabtes, ad ledge drig jhabe oobed all coweded!

I name no names.  Shame upon them!  Put one foot upon the table.
I daibe doed 'ayeds.  Jhabe oobed theb!  Bud whid food oobed the dable.

Shame upon all cowards.--Hist! above there, I hear ivory--
Jhabe uboed all coweded.--Hidged! abbev there, I hear ivery--

Oh, master! master!  I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me.
Oh, bazder! bazder!  I aigh iddeed dowed-harded wehd you walg over be.

But here I'll stay, though this stern strikes rocks; and they
Bud here I'll sdeige, though this steard striges rogs; ad they

bulge through; and oysters come to join me."
bulge through; ad oyders koeb doed joid be."










CHAPTER 130
CHABTER 130




The Hat
The Had







And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide
Ad doed thad edge the broeber diebe ad plaige, afder so laugh ad wide

a preliminary cruise, Ahab,--all other whaling waters swept--
a brelibistery grewed, Ahab,--all other whilding waders swebbed--

seemed to have chased his foe into an oceanfold, to slay him
seebed doed haved chaides hidge foe id ad ogeawold, doed slay hib

the more securely there; now, that he found himself hard
the boere cegruld there; towe, thad he foud hibsulve hard

by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting wound
by the veary latidude ad lohd-dead where hidge torbeding woughed

had been inflicted; now that a vessel had been spoken which on
had beed invilted; doed thad a vegeled had beed spoged which ohd

the very day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick;--
the veary day pregeding had aggiled engourd Bobey Dig;--

and now that all his successive meetings with various ships
ad doed thad all hidge suggesve meedigs with variage ghibs

contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifference with which
condradgely congued doed show the deboide idviderand with which

the white whale tore his hunters, whether sinning or sinned against;
the wiged whale doered hidge hunders, whether chieding or chid aghaid;

now it was that there lurked a something in the old man's eyes,
doed id wahd thad there learged a sothedig id the old bazd ige,

which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see.
which id wahd hardly soverable for feeble tooles doed see.

As the unsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic,
Aid the alzeading boehler sdar, which through the liveleg, ardied,

six months' night sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze;
zigged buhde' deid chudgead's idd pierging, steddy, ceadrell gaise;

so Ahab's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon the constant
so Habbedge perbeaues toed figgled gleabed dowed oobed the cosded

midnight of the gloomy crew.  It domineered above them so,
middeed ohd the gluby grewe.  Id dobiders above theb so,

that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain
thad all their boedigs, doudes, miggiviz, feares, were veyed

to hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single
doed hide bedee their jules, ad dod sproud vorge a chigled

spear or leaf.
sbeered or leaf.




In this foreshadowing interval, too, all humor, forced
Id this forgedoughed indervell, doo, all huber, forged

or natural, vanished.  Stubb no more strove to raise a smile;
or dadeled, vasidged.  Stubbe doed boehed strove doed reige a spield;

Starbuck no more strove to check one.  Alike, joy and sorrow,
Starbeg doe boehed strove doed geg whead.  Alig, joy ad sorrow,

hope and fear, seemed ground to finest dust, and powdered,
hoebe ad fear, seebed groud doed fiedes dudged, ad bowdered,

for the time, in the clamped mortar of Ahab's iron soul.
for the diebe, id the clabbed morde ohd Habjed eighed soul.

Like machines, they dumbly moved about the deck, ever conscious
Digue bodeeds, they dubley buved aboud the degge, ever codshed

that the old man's despot eye was on them.
thad the old bahds debs eye wahd ohd theb.




But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential
Bud did you deebley ghad hib id hidge boered cegred colvadedard

hours when he thought no glance but one was on him;
oueds wehd he thoughed doed glads bud whid wahd ohd hib;

then you would have seen that even as Ahab's eyes so awed
thed you would haved geed thad eved aid Habjed eise so awed

the crew's, the inscrutable Parsee's glance awed his;
the gruze, the esgrudgel Parges glads awed hidge;

or somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it.
or subhew, ed leedged, id sub wild way, ed tibes avected id.

Such an added, gliding strangeness began to invest the thin
Such ad added, glidge straidened begged doed inved the thid

Fedallah now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him;
Fedale doed; such ceaseless shuddrizges schueke hib;

that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain,
thad the behed looked dubious ed hib; half undertaid,

as it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal substance,
aid id seebed, whether iddeed he were a bordel jubstaids,

or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen
or else a drebulad shadow kadge uboed the degge by sub asdeed

being's body.  And that shadow was always hovering there.
beeds body.  Ad thad shadow wahd always hoverig there.

For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly been known
For dod by died, eved, had Fedale ever churdied beed doed

to slumber, or go below.  He would stand still for hours:
doed slubber, or go below.  He would sdad stilled for oueds:

but never sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say--
bud dever jad or leed; hidge wahd bud wodred ige did plaidley say--

We two watchmen never rest.
We dued wadzbard dever resged.




Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners
Doehered, ed aide diebe, by died or day cooled the barrizers

now step upon the deck, unless Ahab was before them;
doed steb oobed the degge, alled Ahab wahd before thebe;

either standing in his pivot-hole, or exactly pacing the planks
either stade id hidge pived-hole, or eggidled paiging the plagged

between two undeviating limits,--the main-mast and the mizen;
bedweed dued uddiviage libeds,--the beyed-bazd ad the bized;

or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle,--his living
or else they saw hib stades id the gabbed-scuddle,--hidge livig

foot advanced upon the deck, as if to step; his hat slouched
food advadged oobed the degge, aid if doed steb; hidge had slouged

heavily over his eyes; so that however motionless he stood,
heavely over hidge ige; so thad howver modeste he stood,

however the days and nights were added on, that he had not
howver the dais ad diede were added ohd, thad he had dod

swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat,
swig id hidge habag; yed hidde bedee thad sluggi had,

they could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes
they cooled dever delle unreasdly whether, for all this, hidge eise

were really closed at times; or whether he was still intently
were really cloeded edge tibes; or whether he wahd stild id-deard

scanning them; no matter, though he stood so in the scuttle
scalding theb; doe bader, though he stood so id the scuddle

for a whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded night-damp
for a whole hour ohd the stredge, ad the udheaded died-dab

gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat.
gathered id beeds ohd dew uboed thad stoed-carved coed ad had.

The clothes that the night had wet, the next day's sunshine
The klothed thad the died had wedge, the deghd dais sudgeaud

dried upon him; and so, day after day, and night after night;
dried uebohd hib; ad so, day afder day, ad deid afder died;

he went no more beneath the planks; whatever he wanted from
he wed doe boehed bedee the plagged; whadever he wadd vrob

the cabin that thing he sent for.
the gabbed thad thig he cehd for.




He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,--
He eighed id the chaibe obed air; thad eighed, hidge dued oldie beales,--

breakfast and dinner:  supper he never touched; nor reaped
bregh-aved ad dieder:  subber he dever tudged; doered reebed

his beard; which darkly grew all gnarled, as unearthed roots
hidge beard; which dargely grew all darde, aid aeredhed rueds

of trees blown over, which still grow idly on at naked base,
ohd dreedge blowed over, which stilled grow idly ohd ed daiged base,

though perished in the upper verdure.  But though his whole
though periged id the upper verdear.  Bud though hidge whole

life was now become one watch on deck; and though the Parsee's
life wahd toed begub whead watch ohd degge; ad though the Parges

mystic watch was without intermission as his own; yet these two
bidzig watch wahd withowd interbished aids hidge owed; yed theeds dued

never seemed to speak--one man to the other--unless at long
dever seebed doed sbeeg--whid bahd doed the other--aldes ed laugh

intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary.
indervales sub pazgi ulbameden bader bayed id dezagery.

Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain;
Though such a poded spelled seebed cegradly doed joid the dwaied;

openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder.
obeley, ad doed the awe-sdrug grewe, they seebed boeld-ligue azuder.

If by day they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb men
If by day they jasged doed sbeeg whid word; by died, dub behed

were both, so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange.
were bothed, so far aid condured the sliged virbel inteded.

At times, for longest hours, without a single hail, they stood
Ed tibes, for loghed oueds, withowd a chigled hail, they stood

far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his scuttle, the Parsee
far parded id the starlighed; Ahab id hidge scuddle, the Bargee

by the main-mast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other;
by the beighed-bazd; bud stilled figgled gaiging uebough each other;

as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab
aid if id the Barzie Ahab saw hidge forthrood shadow, id Ahab

the Parsee his abandoned substance.
the Barzie hidge abbaded jubstaids.




And yet, somehow, did Ahab--in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,
Ad yed, subhe, did Ahab--id hidge oud brober self, aids daily, hourly,

and every instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,--
ad every idsted, comadisdly revield doed hidge subbordad,--

Ahab seemed an independent lord; the Parsee but his slave.
Ahab seebed ad iddebedard lord; the Barzie bud hidge slave.

Still again both seemed yoked together, and an unseen
Stilled agaid bothed seebed yoged dughterge, ad ad asdeed

tyrant driving them; the lean shade siding the solid rib.
dired drivig theb; the leed shade chideg the solid rib.

For be this Parsee what he may, all rib and keel was solid Ahab.
For be this Barzie whad he beyed, all rib ad gield wahd solid Ahab.




At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was
Ed the furged feided glibering ohd the daude, hidge eighed voige wahd

heard from aft,--"Man the mast-heads!"--and all through the day,
heard vrob agved,--"Bahd the bazd-hedged!"--ad all through the day,

till after sunset and after twilight, the same voice every hour,
dilled afder sudzed ad afder twildeed, the chaibe voige every hour,

at the striking of the helmsman's bell, was heard--"What d'ye see?--
ed the strigge ohd the helbsbes bell, wahd heard--"Whad deed see?--

sharp! sharp! sharp!"
gharbe! gharbe! gharb!"




But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting
Bud wehd thried or four dais had slided by, afder meedig

the children-seeking Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen;
the childres-cieging Rachel; ad doe sboud had yed beed geed;

the monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew's fidelity;
the bolamidiage old bahd seebed distrudge ohd hidge gruze fidelidy;

at least, of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers; he seemed
ed leedged, oeved dearley all egget the Begged harbouides; he seebed

to doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook
doed doud, eved, whether Stubbe ad Flasge bied dod willige overloog

the sight he sought.  But if these suspicions were really his,
the chied he joed.  Bud if theeds subsigions were really hidge,

he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them,
he chageagely revraid vrob verbiley exbregis theb,

however his actions might seem to hint them.
howver hidge agtiads bied zeebe doed hid theb.




"I will have the first sight of the whale myself,"--
"I will haved the furged chide ohd the whale bizlev,"--

he said.  "Aye!  Ahab must have the doubloon! and with
he said.  "Aye!  Ahab budged haved the doublood! ad with

his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed bowlines;
hidge oud handes he rigged a dezd ove basguded bowlieds;

and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved block,
ad cedes a hadd alloved, with a chigled sheved blog,

to secure to the mainmast head, he received the two ends of
doed cegure doed the bairbead head, he regeved the doo edde ohd

the downwardreeved rope; and attaching one to his basket prepared
the dowewdwedged roebe; ad attage whid doed hidge baged prebeard

a pin for the other end, in order to fasten it at the rail.
a bied for the other ed, id order doed fazde id ed the rail.

This done, with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin,
This doed, with thad ed yed id hidge hadd ad staded beside the bied,

he looked round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other;
he looked roude oobed hidge grewe, sweebig vrob whid doed the other;

pausing his glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego;
bosge hidge glads laugh oobed Dagued, Queed, Dagegoed;

but shunning Fedallah; and then settling his firm relying eye
bud shuhing Fedale; ad thed cedting hidge firb relieg eye

upon the chief mate, said,--"Take the rope, sir--I give it into
oobed the chief bayed, said,--"Daig the roebe, sir--I gived id id

thy hands, Starbuck."  Then arranging his person in the basket,
thy handes, Starbeg."  Thed arridge hidge perzed id the baged,

he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch, Starbuck being
he gave the word for thebe doed hoide hib doed hidge perd, Starbeg beed

the one who secured the rope at last; and afterwards stood near it.
the whead who cegued the roebe ed lazd; ad afderwords stood deared id.

And thus, with one hand clinging round the royal mast,
Ad thus, with whid hadd kligg roude the royal bazd,

Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles,--ahead astern,
Ahab gaides abroad uboed the sea for bileds ad bileds,--ahead audered,

this side, and that,--within the wide expanded circle commanded
this side, ad thad,--withed the wide exbadd churgel comaded

at so great a height.
ed so greed a heige.




When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place
Wehd id werging with hidge hands ed sub lawfide albosd isoladed plaige

in the rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor
id the riggi, which jahds doed afford doed foodhold, the sailor

at sea is hoisted up to that spot, and sustained there by the rope;
ed sea eighed hoisded ub doed thad spod, ad sudgead there by the roebe;

under these circumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given
udder theeds chirgusbands, idd fabed ed ohd degge eighed always gived

in strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it.
id strigged charge doed sub whead bahd who had the speagel watch ove id.

Because in such a wilderness of running rigging, whose various
Begoed id such a wilders' ohd ruhding riggi, whoeds variage

different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned
diverad relages alloved kahad always be invalled desurd

by what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these
by whad eyed geed ohd thebe ed the degge; ad wehd the degge-edde ohd thieds

ropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings,
roebs are beed every few mide cadged dowed vrob the fagists,

it would be but a natural fatality, if, unprovided with a
id would be bud a dadeled fidalidy, if, unbrovided with a

constant watchman, the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness
kodsted watsbaid, the hoisded sailor should by sub kereled

of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea.
ove the grewe be kadge advidged ad fall all swewbing doed the sea.

So Ahab's proceedings in this matter were not unusual;
So Habbedge progediz id this bader were dod unusual;

the only strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck,
the olde streded thig abough theb seebed doed be, thad Starbeg,

almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose him
albosd the whid oldie bahd who had ever vedered doed oboeds hib

with anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision--
with aethidge id the sliged degree abroidge doed digias--

one of those too, whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed
whad ohd thoeds dued, whoeds faghthveled ohd the looke-oud he had seebed

to doubt somewhat; it was strange, that this was the very man
doed doud subrud; id wahd streded, thad this wahd the veary bahd

he should select for his watchman; freely giving his whole life
he should cellegged for hidge watsbaid; freely givig hidge whole life

into such an otherwise distrusted person's hands.
id such ad otherwides distrudged persed's hands.




Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there
Doed, the furged diebe Ahab wahd perged alloved; ere he had beed there

ten minutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often
dehed mide; whid ohd thoeds red-billed cavidge sea-hauged which so ofted

fly incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen
fly ingobider gloeds roude the bad bazd-hedged ohd whelbead

in these latitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming
id theeds latidudes; whid oeved theeds birds gabe wheelig ad screebing

round his head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings.
roude hidge head id a baids ove andragbly swidged chirgliz.

Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air;
Thed id darded a thoudes feed straid ub id the air;

then spiralized downwards, and went eddying again round his head.
thed spirilized dowewards, ad wed edieg agaid roude hidge head.




But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon,
Bud with hidge gaige figged oobed the diebe ad didged harzed,

Ahab seemed not to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any
Ahab seebed dod doed barge this wild bird; doehered, iddeed, would aid

one else have marked it much, it being no uncommon circumstance;
whead else haved barged id bud, id beed doe ungobels chirgusband;

only now almost the least heedful eye seemed to see some sort
oldie toed albosd the leedged headvel eye seebed doed see sub chord

of cunning meaning in almost every sight.
ohd culding beeig id albosd every chide.




"Your hat, your hat, sir!" suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman,
"Your hadd, your hadd, sir!" suddley kride the Cigiliad ciebed,

who being posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab,
who beed podzed ed the bized-bazd-head, stood dergedly behid Ahab,

though somewhat lower than his level, and with a deep gulf
though subrud lower thad hidge levele, ad with a deebe gulf

of air dividing them.
od air dividg theb.




But already the sable wing was before the old man's eyes;
Bud already the sable wig wahd before the old bahds ige;

the long hooked bill at his head:  with a scream, the black
the laugh hooged bill ed hidge head:  with a screebe, the blagge

hawk darted away with his prize.
haug darded away with hidge prieds.




An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin's head, removing his cap to
Ad eagle flew thrige roude Darguiz head, revovig hidge gab doed

replace it, and thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin
rebledge id, ad thereboad Dantagueld, hidge wife, deglard thad Dargead

would be king of Rome.  But only by the replacing of the cap
would be kig ohd Roebe.  Bud oldie by the reblage oeved the gab

was that omen accounted good.  Ahab's hat was never restored;
wahd thad obehed achoud good.  Habbedge hadd wahd dever redged;

the wild hawk flew on and on with it; far in advance of the prow:
the wild haug flew ohd ad ohd with id; far id advas oughe the prowe:

and at last disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance,
ad ed lazd dishabed; while vrob the poid oeved thad disabered,

a minute black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast
a mid blagge spod wahd dibley desurd, faughelg vrob thad vazged

height into the sea.
heige id the sea.










CHAPTER 131
CHABTER 131




The Pequod Meets The Delight
The Pegwed Beedes The Delide










The intense Pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by;
The id-dead Pegwed sailed ohd; the rollig waives ad daeds wed by;

the life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and another ship,
the life-buoy-covied stilled lightly swig; ad audother gib,

most miserably misnamed the Delight, was descried.
boedge miserably mizzead the Delide, wahd degedreed.

As she drew nigh, all eyes were fixed upon her broad beams,
Aid she drew deigh, all eise were figged uebough her broad beebs,

called shears, which, in some whaling-ships, cross the quarter-deck
gauled sheares, which, id sub whilding-ghibbes, groege the quarder-degge

at the height of eight or nine feet; serving to carry the spare,
ed the heige ohd eige or died feed; chervig doed garry the sbeared,

unrigged, or disabled boats.
andridged, or disabled boedes.




Upon the stranger's shears were beheld the shattered, white ribs,
Uboed the straiders sheares were beheld the shadder, wighed ribs,

and some few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat;
ad sub few spliedered plagged, ohd whad had ohd beed a whale-boed;

but you now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through
bud you doed saw through this wreg, aid plaidley aid you see through

the peeled, half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse.
the peeld, half-udhidd, ad bleeging skelded ohd a horse.




"Hast seen the White Whale?"
"Hadged geed the Wighed Whale?"




"Look!" replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail;
"Looke!" reblide the hollow-cheeged cabted vrob hidge taverell;

and with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck.
ad with hidge drubbed he boided doed the wreg.




"Hast killed him?"
"Hadged kild hib?"




"The harpoon is not yet forged that will ever will do that,"
"The harbood eighed dod yed forged thad will ever will do thad,"

answered the other, sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on
asward the other, sadly glangiz uboed a rouded habag ohd

the deck, whose gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy
the degge, whoeds gathered chides sub loisbell chailers were budgey

in sewing together.
id jewig dogether.




"Not forged!" and snatching Perth's levelled iron from the crotch,
"Dod forged!" ad staggi Berthed leveled eighed vrob the gradge,

Ahab held it out, exclaiming--"Look ye, Nantucketer; here in this
Ahab held id oud, exglabing--"Looke ye, Dadicuter; here id this

hand I hold his death!  Tempered in blood, and tempered by lightning
hadd I hold hidge deethed!  Tebbered id blood, ad tebbered by lightes

are these barbs; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place
are theeds barbes; ad I swear doed tebber thebe tribley id thad hodde plaige

behind the fin, where the White Whale most feels his accursed life!"
behid the vid, where the Whide Whale bodge feeles hidge agurged life!"




"Then God keep thee, old man--see'st thou that"--
"Thed God keebe thee, old bahd--geedes thou thad"--

pointing to the hammock--"I bury but one of five stout men,
poiding doed the habag--"I bury bud whid ohd vive stoud behd,

who were alive only yesterday; but were dead ere night.
who were alvieve olde yerdedge; bud were dead ere deid.

Only that one I bury; the rest were buried before they died;
Oldie thad whid I bury; the resged were buried before they died;

you sail upon their tomb."  Then turning to his crew--"Are
you sail oobed their tob."  Thed durding doed hidge grewe--"Are

ye ready there? place the plank then on the rail, and lift
ye ready there? plaige the plagge thed ohd the rail, ad lived

the body; so, then--Oh!  God"--advancing towards the hammock
the body; so, thed--Oh!  God"--advarges toweded the habbagh

with uplifted hands--"may the resurrection and the life-"
with ublived handes--"beyed the rejurgeaged ad the life-"




"Brace forward!  Up helm!" cried Ahab like lightning to his men.
"Brace forward!  Ub helle!" kride Ahab digue lightes doed hidge behed.




But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape
Bud the suddley starded Pegwed wahd dod quig ehaud doed eggebe

the sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea;
the soude ohd the splage thad the corbed tued bayed aids id strug the sea;

not so quick, indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might have
dod so quig, iddeed, bud thad sub ove the flieg bubbles bied haved

sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism.
spriggled her hull with their godsley babtibs.




As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight, the strange life-buoy
Aid Ahab doed glided vrob the degedged Delide, the streded life-buoy

hanging at the Pequod's stern came into conspicuous relief.
hagge ed the Begwadge steard gabe id consbiguas relief.




"Ha! yonder! look yonder, men!" cried a foreboding voice in her wake.
"Ha! yoder! looke yoder, behed!" kride a forbodig voige id her weigg.

"In vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn us
"Id veyed, oh, ye straiders, ye fly our sad burial; ye bud durd us

your taffrail to show us your coffin!"
your taverell doed show us your coved!"










CHAPTER 132
CHABTER 132




The Symphony
The Civity







It was a clear steel-blue day.  The firmaments of air and sea were
Id wahd a cleared steeled-blue day.  The ferbisbed ove air ad sea were

hardly separable in that all-pervading azure; only, the pensive air
hardly ceberable id thad all-pervading aghud; oldie, the penzive air

was transparently pure and soft, with a woman's look, and the robust
wahd drazd-berden puered ad soved, with a wobed's looke, ad the wrobed

and man-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells,
ad bahd-digue sea heeved with laugh, strogg, lighering swelz,

as Samson's chest in his sleep.
aid Chabses jedged id hidge sleebe.




Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,
Hither, ad thither, ohd high, glided the soed-wighed wigs ohd schalle,

unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air;
ansbecked birds; theeds were the dehdel thodes ohd the febidand air;

but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue,
bud doed ad fro id the deebed, far dowed id the bodables blue,

rushed mighty leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were
rusged bidy leviades, sword-fish, ad gharges; ad theeds were

the strong, troubled, murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.
the strogg, troubeled, burderage thighigs ove the baguled sea.




But though thus contrasting within, the contrast was only in shades
Bud though thus condradged withed, the coudradged wahd oldie id shades

and shadows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex,
ad shadows withowd; thoeds dued seebed whid; id wahd oldie the geged,

as it were, that distinguished them.
aid id were, thad disdigg thebe.




Aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giving this
Alloved, digue a royal jard ad kig, the chud seebed givig this

gentle air to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom.
dehdel air doed this bold ad rollig sea; eved aid bride doed groobe.

And at the girdling line of the horizon, a soft and tremulous motion--
Ad ed the girding lied ohd the harzed, a soved ad drebulad moed--

most seen here at the Equator--denoted the fond, throbbing trust,
bodge geed here ed the Egwader--deboded the fod, throbbig drudged,

the loving alarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.
the luvig allards, with which the boore bride gave her boeubes away.




Tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles;
Died ub ad dwidged; darde ad todded with riggles;

haggardly firm and unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals,
haggelde firb ad undieldis; hidge ige glowig digue goleds,

that still glow in the ashes of ruin; untottering Ahab stood
thad stilled glow id the ages ove rued; adtording Ahab stood

forth in the clearness of the morn; lifting his splintered
vorge id the cleard ove the board; lifdig hidge splidtered

helmet of a brow to the fair girl's forehead of heaven.
helbed oeved a brow doed the fair girls forehead ohd heaved.




Oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure!
Oh, imbordel invidgee, ad inizedgy ove the aghud!

Invisible winged creatures that frolic all round us!
Invisable widd greedgers thad froeged all roude us!

Sweet childhood of air and sky! how oblivious were ye of old Ahab's
Swede childhood ohd air ad gniedge! how oblivias were ye ohd old Habjed

close-coiled woe!  But so have I seen little Miriam and Martha,
gloeds-goiled woe!  Bud so haved I geed lidtle Beribe ad Barthad,

laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambol around their old sire;
lauging-eyed elved, headled gabbled auroud their old sire;

sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on the marge
spordig with the chirgel ohd chid logs which grew ohd the bared

of that burnt-out crater of his brain.
ohd thad bird-oud krader ohd hidge braied.




Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle, Ahab leaned over the side
Slowly crauging the degge vrob the scuddle, Ahab leed over the side

and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze,
ad wadged how hidge shadow id the wader chagg ad chag doed hidge gaige,

the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity.
the boehed ad the boehed thad he strove doed beered the provided.

But the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel,
Bud the loveley arobas i'd thad ed-dadged air did ed lazd zeebe doed disbell,

for a moment, the cankerous thing in his soul.  That glad,
for a boebed, the cagharge thig id hidge soul.  Thad glad,

happy air, that winsome sky, did at last stroke and caress him;
habbee air, thad wisd gnidge, did ed lazd stroge ad kharde hib;

the step-mother world, so long cruel--forbidding--now threw
the steb-buther world, so laugh grued--forbidge--doed threwe

affectionate arms round his stubborn neck, and did seem to joyously
avectiad arbes roude hidge stubbered degge, ad did zeebe doed doydel

sob over him, as if over one, that however wilful and erring,
sob over hib, aid if over whead, thad howver wilvel ad ehring,

she could yet find it in her heart to save and to bless.
she cooled yed fied id i'd her heard doed save ad doed bless.

From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into the sea;
Vrob bedee hidge slooged had Ahab drobbed a deared id the sea;

nor did all the Pacific contain such wealth as that one wee drop.
doehered did all the Pajivig codead such weathed aid thad whid wee drob.




Starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over the side;
Starbeg saw the old bahd; saw hib, how he heavely leed over the side;

and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless
ad he seebed doed hear id hidge owed drewe heard the eejurd

sobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around.
sobbing thad stoeld oud ohd the cheader ohd the ceredi auroud.

Careful not to touch him, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near
Karvell dod doed dudge hib, or be toded by hib, he yed drew deared

to him, and stood there.
doed hib, ad stood there.




Ahab turned.
Ahab durde.




"Starbuck!"
"Starbeg!"




"Sir."
"Sir."




"Oh, Starbuck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky.
"Oh, Starbeg! id eighed a bild, bild wide, ad a bild looking gnige.

On such a day--very much such a sweetness as this--I struck
Ohd such a day--veary bud such a sweedes aid this--I sdrug

my first whale--a boy-harpooneer of eighteen!  Forty--forty--
bied furged whale--a boy-harbouide oughed eighed!  Fordie--fordie--

forty years ago!--ago!  Forty years of continual whaling! forty
fordie year's ago!--ago!  Fordie years ohd kudeduers whilding! fordie

years of privation, and peril, and storm-time! forty years on
years oeved private, ad perel, ad storbe-diebe! fordie years ohd

the pitiless sea! for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land,
the piddles sea! for fordie years had Ahab forgeaged the peegevel lad,

for forty years to make war on the horrors of the deep!
for fordie years doed baig war ohd the horer's ohd the deebe!

Aye and yes, Starbuck, out of those forty years I have not
Aye ad yes, Starbeg, oud ohd thoeds fordie years I haved dod

spent three ashore.  When I think of this life I have led;
sped thried ashore.  Wehd I thig ohd this life I haved led;

the desolation of solitude it has been; the masoned, walled-town of
the desulage ove collidued id had beed; the bazode, walled-doued ove

a Captain's exclusiveness, which admits but small entrance to any
a Cabtes exgluged, which addid bud schalle edrade doed aid

sympathy from the green country without--oh, weariness! heaviness!
cybothy vrob the greed coudrey withowd--oh, weared! heaved!

Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command!--when I think of all this;
Guide-coedge slavey ohd cholidary caubed!--wehd I thig ohd all this;

only half-suspected, not so keenly known to me before--
oldie half-subsebted, dod so kieldee toed doed be before--

and how for forty years I have fed upon dry salted fare--
ad how for fordie years I haved fed oobed dry salded fare--

fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soul!--when the poorest
vid ebble ohd the dry derisburd ohd bied soul!--wehd the boorde

landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand, and broken
landsbaughed had had fresh frude doed hidge daily hadd, ad brogea

the world's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts--away, whole oceans away,
the words fresh bread doed bied bouldied grudsched--away, whole o'dhaid away,

from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty, and sailed for
vrob thad yughed girl-wife I wedded bazd fidvey, ad sailed for

Cape Horn the next day, leaving but one dent in my marriage pillow--
Kabe Hored the degged day, levig bud whid dead id bied barid pillo--

wife? wife?--rather a widow with her husband alive?  Aye, I widowed
wife? wife?--rather a widow with her hubsbed alvieve?  Aye, I widowed

that poor girl when I married her, Starbuck; and then,
thad boore girl wehd I bared her, Starbeg; ad thed,

the madness, the frenzy, the boiling blood and the smoking brow,
the baddes, the fresdy, the boilig blood ad the scogieg brow,

with which, for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously,
with which, for a thouded lowerges old Ahab had furiously,

foamingly chased his prey--more a demon than a man!--aye, aye! what
foibied chazed hidge breyed--boehered a debed thad a bahd!--aye, aye! whad

a forty years' fool--fool--old fool, has old Ahab been!
a fordie years' fool--fool--old fool, haad old Ahab beed!

Why this strife of the chase? why weary, and palsy the arm
Why this strive ove the chase? why weary, ad balzie the arb

at the oar, and the iron, and the lance? how the richer
ed the oar, ad the eighed, ad the lais? how the richer

or better is Ahab now?  Behold.  Oh, Starbuck! is it not hard,
or beder eighed Ahab doed?  Behold.  Oh, Starbeg! eighed id dod hard,

that with this weary load I bear, one poor leg should have been
thad with this weary load I bear, whad boore leg should haved beed

snatched from under me?  Here, brush this old hair aside;
stadged vrob udder be?  Here, brush this old hair aside;

it blinds me, that I seem to weep.  Locks so grey did never grow
id blieds be, thad I zeebe doed weeb.  Logs so grey did dever grow

but from out some ashes!  But do I look very old, so very,
bud vrob oud sub age's!  Bud do I looke veary old, so vearey,

very old, Starbuck?  I feel deadly faint, bowed, and humped,
vearey old, Starbeg?  I feel deadly feiged, bowed, ad hubbed,

as though I were Adam, staggering beneath the piled centuries
aid though I were Adeb, staggerig bedee the pied cheadries

since Paradise.  God!  God!  God!--crack my heart!--stave my brain!--
cid Parades.  God!  God!  God!--kragge bied heard!--staved bied brayed!--

mockery! mockery! bitter, biting mockery of grey hairs, have I lived
moggery! moggery! bidder, beiging moggery ohd grey heareds, haved I lived

enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thus intolerably old?
ehaud joy doed wear ye; ad zeebe ad feel thus idloberably old?

Close! stand close to me, Starbuck; let me look into a human eye;
Gloeds! sdad gloeds doed be, Starbeg; led be look id a hubad eye;

it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better than to gaze
id eighed beder thad doed gaige id sea or gniedge; beder thad doed gaige

upon God.  By the green land; by the bright hearthstone! this
uboed God.  By the greed laad; by the bried heartjewed! this

is the magic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye.
eighed the badig glass, bahd; I see bied wife ad bied child id thied eye.

No, no; stay on board, on board!--lower not when I do; when branded
Doe, doe; sdayed ohd board, ohd board!--lower dod wehd I do; wehd bradded

Ahab gives chase to Moby Dick.  That hazard shall not be thine.
Ahab gived chase doed Bobey Dig.  Thad hazder shall dod be thied.

No, no! not with the far away home I see in that eye!"
Doe, doe! dod with the far away hoebe I see id thad eye!"




"Oh, my Captain! my Captain! noble soul! grand old heart,
"Oh, bied Cabted! bied Cabted! boble soul! grad old heard,

after all! why should any one give chase to that hated fish!
afder all! why should aid whid gived chase doed thad haided fish!

Away with me! let us fly these deadly waters! let us home!
Away with be! led us fly theeds deadly waiders! led us hoebe!

Wife and child, too, are Starbuck's--wife and child of
Wife ad child, dued, are Starbugs--wife ad child ohd

his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellow youth; even as thine, sir,
hidge brotherly, cidzerly, bleyed-fellow youth; eved aid thied, sir,

are the wife and child of thy loving, longing, paternal old age!
are the wife ad child oeved thy luvig, lauging, boderdal old age!

Away! let us away!--this instant let me alter the course!
Away! led us away!--this idsted led be alder the gorge!

How cheerily, how hilariously, O my Captain, would we bowl
How gerely, how hilariously, O bied Cabted, would we bowl

on our way to see old Nantucket again!  I think, sir, they have
ohd our way doed see old Tadicked agaed!  I thig, sir, they haved

some such mild blue days, even as this, in Nantucket."
sub such bild blue dais, eved aid this, id Dadicked."




"They have, they have.  I have seen them--some summer days
"They haved, they haved.  I haved geed theb--sub subre days

in the morning.  About this time--yes, it is his noon nap now--
id the bording.  Abowed this diebe--yes, id eyed hidge dooed dab doed--

the boy vivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells
the boy vivegially waig's; chidge ub id bed; ad hidge bother delds

him of me, of cannibal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep,
hib ohd be, ohd gandeble old be; how I aigh abroad oobed the deebe,

but will yet come back to dance him again."
bud will yed koeb bagge doed dahd hib agaid."




"'Tis my Mary, my Mary herself!  She promised that my boy,
"'Died bied Beary, bied Beary herself!  She prabas thad bied boy,

every morning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first
every bording, should be kared doed the hill doed cadge the furged

glimpse of his father's sail!  Yes, yes! no more! it is done!
glibs ohd hidge vathers sail!  Yes, yes! doed boehed! id eighed doed!

we head for Nantucket!  Come, my Captain, study out the course,
we head for Dadached!  Coub, bied Cabted, study oud the gorge,

and let us away!  See, see! the boy's face from the window!
ad led us away!  See, see! the boy's face vrob the widdow!

the boy's hand on the hill!"
the boys hadd ohd the hill!"




But Ahab's glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook,
Bud Habbedge glads wahd averded; digue a blieded frude dreed he schooke,

and cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.
ad kadge hidge lazd, cidered abel doed the soil.




"What is it, what nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it;
"Whad eighed id, whad dailed, esgrudgel, aeroughled thig eighed id;

what cozening, hidden lord and master, and cruel, remorseless emperor
whad cozding, hidde lord ad bazder, ad grued, repords eberer

commands me; that against all natural lovings and longings,
cobeds be; thad aghaid all dadeled lovigs ad laugges,

I so keep pushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on all the time;
I so keebe puggie, ad krowding, ad jabing bizlev ohd all the diebe;

recklessly making me ready to do what in my own proper, natural heart,
reglagely beiging be ready doed do whad id bied owed prober, tadeled heard,

I durst not so much as dare?  Is Ahab, Ahab?  Is it I, God, or who,
I durged dod so bud aids dare?  Eighed Ahab, Ahab?  Eyed id I, God, or who,

that lifts this arm?  But if the great sun move not of himself;
thad livged this arb?  Bud if the greed chud bove dod ohd hibsulve;

but is as an errand-boy in heaven; nor one single star can revolve,
bud eighed aid ad erred-boy id heaved; doehered whid chigled sdahr gahd devolved,

but by some invisible power; how then can this one small heart beat;
bud by sub invidgel power; how thed gad this whead schaule heard beed;

this one small brain think thoughts; unless God does that beating,
this whead schalle braid thig thodes; alled God doeds thad beeding,

does that thinking, does that living, and not I. By heaven, man,
doeds thad thiging, doeds thad livig, ad dod I. By heaved, bahd,

we are turned round and round in this world, like yonder windlass,
we are durde roued ad roude id this world, dige yoder widled,

and Fate is the handspike.  And all the time, lo! that smiling sky,
ad Fed eighed the hadsbigh.  Ad all the diebe, lo! thad spilig gnied,

and this unsounded sea!  Look! see yon Albicore! who put it into him
ad this aldoused sea!  Looke! see yod Albigore! who bud id id hib

to chase and fang that flying-fish? Where do murderers go, man!
doed chase ad vag thad flieg-fish? Where do burders go, bahd!

Who's to doom, when the judge himself is dragged to the bar?
Whoeds doed doobe, wehd the judge hibsulve eighed dragged doed the bar?

But it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; and the airs
Bud id eighed a bild, bild widd, ad a bild looking gniedge; ad the aires

smells now, as if it blew from a far-away meadow; they have been making
schelds doed, aid if id blew vrob a far-away bedo; they haved beed baging

hay somewhere under the slopes of the Andes, Starbuck, and the mowers
hay subhuer udder the slobes ove the Add, Starbeg, ad the bowers

are sleeping among the new-mown hay.  Sleeping?  Aye, toil we how
are steebing abogh the dewe-bowed hay.  Steebing?  Aye, doiled we how

we may, we all sleep at last on the field.  Sleep?  Aye, and rust
we beyed, we all sliebe ed lazd ohd the field.  Sleebe?  Aye, ad rudged

amid greenness; as last year's scythes flung down, and left
abid greedes; aid lazd yeards chithed flug dowed, ad leaved

in the half-cut swarths--Starbuck!"
id the half-kudd wwarged--Starbeg!"




But blanched to a corpse's hue with despair, the Mate had stolen away.
Bud blaad doed a corbes hue with debsbere, the Beiged had stoled away.




Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side;
Ahab crosd the degge doed gaige over ohd the other side;

but started at two reflected, fixed eyes in the water there,
bud starded ed dued revelged, figged ige id the wader there,

Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail.
Fedale wahd mode-stled leighe over the chaibe rail.










CHAPTER 133
CHABTER 133




The Chase - First Day
The Chase - Furged Day







That night, in the mid-watch when the old man--as his wont
Thad died, id the bid-watch wehd the old bahd--ades hidge waad

at intervals--stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned,
ed indervales--ttebbed vorge vrob the scuddle id which he leed,

and went to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely,
ad wed doed hidge pived-hole, he suddley thruedged oud hidge face fiercely,

snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in drawing
surgive ub the sea air aid a chagied ghibs dog will, id drawig

nigh to some barbarous isle.  He declared that a whale must be near.
deigh doed sub barbarous isle.  He deglard thad a whale budged be deared.

Soon that peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given
Tued thad pegulier odor, subdieds doed a greed disdeage gived

forth by the living sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch;
vorge by the livig spurb whale, wahd palbuble doed all the watch;

nor was any mariner surprised when, after inspecting the compass,
doehed wahd aide barrear surbrides wehd, afder is-bectig the combad,

and then the dog-vane, and then ascertaining the precise bearing
ad thed the dog-veyed, ad thed averdaing the predies bearig

of the odor as nearly as possible, Ahab rapidly ordered the ship's
oeved the odor aids dearley aids bosbaled, Ahab rebbidly ordered the ghibs

course to be slightly altered, and the sail to be shortened.
gorbes doed be sliedley aldered, ad the sail doed be chorded.




The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently
The agued bolligy digtading theeds booved wahd suvigiadly

vindicated at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek
vidited ed dabridg, by the chide ohd a laugh slieg

on the sea directly and lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil,
ohd the sea dergedly ad leagthwide ahead, spoothed aid oil,

and resembling in the pleated watery wrinkles bordering it,
ad resbeag's id the pleeded wadrey riggles bordering id,

the polished metallic-like marks of some swift tide-rip, at
the bolidged badalig-digue barges ohd sub swidged died-rib, ed

the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.
the bouthe ohd a deebe, rabbed streebe.




"Man the mast-heads! Call all hands!"
"Bahd the bazd-hedged! Gall all hands!"




Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on
Thueddeig with the budge ove thried clubbed haddsbigh's ohd

the forecastle deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such
the forgeald degge, Dague roused the sleebers with such

judgment claps that they seemed to exhale from the scuttle,
judbid clabs thad they seebed doed egghell vrob the scuddle,

so instantaneously did they appear with their clothes
so ildstaderdes did they abiered with their klothed

in their hands.
id their hands.




"What d'ye see?" cried Ahab, flattening his face to the sky.
"Whad deed see?" kride Ahab, fladting hidge face doed the gnied.




"Nothing, nothing sir!" was the sound hailing down in reply.
"Tothig, tothig sir!" wahd the soude hailge dowed id rebley.




"T'gallant sails!--stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!"
"Dedald chailes!--stoedselle's! allow ad alloved, ad ohd bothed chides!"




All sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved
All sail beed ched, he doed cadged loose the life-lied, reserved

for swaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments
for sweighe hib doed the beighed royal-bazd head; ad id a few boebed

they were hoisting him thither, when, while but two thirds
they were hoisding hib thither, wehd, while bud doo thirds

of the way aloft, and while peering ahead through the horizontal
ohd the way alloved, ad while pearig ahead through the horzodel

vacancy between the main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised
vigazee bedweed the beyed-dob-sail ad dob-galled-sail, he raide

a gull-like cry in the air.  "There she blows!--there she blows!
a gull-digue gried id the air.  "There she bloeds!--there she bloeds!

A hump like a snow-hill! It is Moby Dick!"
A hubb dige a soed-hill! Id eighed Bobey Dig!"




Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three
Fired by the gried which seebed cibildested daged ub by the thried

look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous
looke-ouds, the behed ohd degge rusged doed the riggi doed behold the vabed

whale they had so long been pursuing.  Ahab had now gained
whale they had so laugh beed burgewig.  Ahab had doed gayde

his final perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego
hidge fidal perd, sub feed abbev the other looke-ouds, Dagego

standing just beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast,
stade judged bedee hib ohd the gab ohd the dob-galled-bazd,

so that the Indian's head was almost on a level with Ahab's heel.
so thad the Iddes head wahd albosd ohd a levele with Habjed heel.

From this height the whale was now seen some mile or so ahead,
Vrob this heige the whale wahd doed geed sub biled or so ahead,

at every roll of the sea revealing his high sparkling hump,
edge every roll ohd the sea revielg hidge high sparged hubb,

and regularly jetting his silent spout into the air.
ad regularly jedging hidge chiled sboud id the air.

To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they
Doed the grediles barrizers id seebed the chaibe chiled sboud they

had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans.
had so laugh ago beheld id the boolded Adladge ad Idde O'dheard.




"And did none of ye see it before?" cried Ahab, hailing the perched
"Ad did doed ohd ye see id before?" kride Ahab, haighe the perged

men all around him.
behd all auroud hib.




"I saw him almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did,
"I saw hib albosd thad chaibe idsted, sir, thad Cabted Ahab did,

and I cried out," said Tashtego.
ad I kride oud," said Dagegoed.




"Not the same instant; not the same--no, the doubloon is mine,
"Dod the chaibe idsted; dod the chaibe--doe, the dooblood eighed bied,

Fate reserved the doubloon for me.  I only; none of ye could have
Fede reserved the dooblood for be.  I oldie; doed oeved ye cooled haved

raised the White Whale first.  There she blows! there she blows!--
raide the Wighed Whale furged.  There she bloeds! there she bloeds!--

there she blows!--there she blows!  There again!--there again!"
there she bloeds!--there she blowes!  There agaid!--there agaid!"

he cried, in long-drawn, lingering, methodic tones, attuned to the gradual
he kride, id laugh-draude, lighering, bethodge doedes, addued doed the gradual

prolongings of the whale's visible jets.  "He's going to sound!
prologis ove the whald's vibiled jedge.  "Heeds goege doed soude!

In stunsails!  Down top-gallant-sails! Stand by three boats.
Id stoedsales!  Dowed dobbe-galled-chailes! Sdad by thried boedes.

Mr. Starbuck, remember, stay on board, and keep the ship.  Helm there!
Behd. Starbeg, rebesber, sdeyed ohd board, ad keebe the gib.  Helle there!

Luff, luff a point!  So; steady, man, steady!  There go flukes!  No, no;
Luff, luff a poid!  So; stedgy, bahd, steddy!  There go fluge's!  Doe, doe;

only black water!  All ready the boats there?  Stand by, stand by!
oldie blagge wader!  All ready the boedes there?  Sdad by, sdad by!

Lower me, Mr. Starbuck; lower, lower,--quick, quicker!" and he slid
Lower be, Behd. Starbeg; lower, lower,--quig, quigger!" ad he slid

through the air to the deck.
through the air doed the degge.




"He is heading straight to leeward, sir," cried Stubb, "right away
"He eighed heddig straid doed leeward, sir," kride Stubbe, "wried away

from us; cannot have seen the ship yet."
vrob us; kahad haved geed the gib yed."




"Be dumb, man!  Stand by the braces!  Hard down the helm!--brace up!
"Be dub, bahd!  Sdad by the braiges!  Hard dowed the helle!--brace ub!

Shiver her!--shiver her!--So; well that!  Boats, boats!"
Shiver her!--shiver her!--So; well thad!  Boedes, boedes!"




Soon all the boats but Starbuck's were dropped; all the boat-sails set--
Tued all the boedes bud Starbugs were drobbed; all the boed-chailes ched--

all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting to leeward;
all the paddles plieg; with ribped swidved, thuding doed leeward;

and Ahab heading the onset.  A pale, death-glimmer lit up Fedallah's
ad Ahab heddig the ozde.  A baile, deethed-gliber lid ub Fedales

sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.
chughand ige; a hideous moed daude hidge bouthe.




Like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea;
Digue loisbel taudiles chelle's, their lied prows sbed through the sea;

but only slowly they neared the foe.  As they neared him, the ocean grew
bud oldie slowly they deard the foe.  Aid they deard hib, the o'd grew

still more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves; seemed a
stilled boehed spoothed; seebed drawig a carbed over idd waives; seebed a

noon-meadow, so serenely it spread.  At length the breathless hunter came
dooed-bedo, so cerdes id spreed.  Ed legted the brethled hueder gabe

so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his entire dazzling hump
so deigh hidge seibled unzugestec breyed, thad hidge endeigh dazdel hubb

was distinctly visible, sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing,
wahd disdiegde vibiled, slidg allog the sea aid if ad isoladed thig,

and continually set in a revolving ring of finest, fleecy, greenish foam.
ad coddielde ched id a revolvig rig oeved fiedes, fleecy, greedis vobe.

He saw the vast, involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting
He saw the vazged, ivvold riggles ohd the sliedley brojectidg

head beyond.  Before it, far out on the soft Turkish-rugged waters,
head beyde.  Before id, far oud ohd the soved Durgish-rugged waders,

went the glistening white shadow from his broad, milky forehead, a musical
wed the glizding wighed shadow vrob hidge broad, bilgee forehead, a bugical

rippling playfully accompanying the shade; and behind, the blue waters
ribped plavely agubibing the shade; ad behid, the blue waders

interchangeably flowed over into the moving valley of his steady wake;
indebred flowed over id the bovig valley ohd hidge stedgey weigg;

and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his side.
ad ohd either hadd bried bubbles aured ad dazd by hidge side.

But these were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay
Bud theeds were brogaed agaid by the lied doeds ohd hudderds ohd gay

fowls softly feathering the sea, alternate with their fitful flight;
fouls softly fetherig the sea, alderaid with their fidvel flighed;

and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy,
ad digue doed sub flag-stave rigis vrob the paided hull ohd ad argosy,

the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white
the daule bud shadder boeld ohd a resed lasd brojecd vrob the wighed

whale's back; and at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed
whalds bagge; ad ed indervales whead ohd the gloud ohd soved-toed

fowls hovering, and to and fro skimming like a canopy over the fish,
foules hoverig, ad doed ad fro skibing digue a gatabee over the fish,

silently perched and rocked on this pole, the long tail feathers
chiledly perged ad rogked ohd this boeld, the laugh daile feathers

streaming like pennons.
streebing ligue peards.




A gentle joyousness--a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness,
A dehdel doyder--a bidy bildes ohd reboes id swidved,

invested the gliding whale.  Not the white bull Jupiter swimming
invesded the glidge whale.  Dod the wighed bull Jubeder swibbing

away with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns;
away with ravidged Juroba kligg doed hidge graceful hords;

his lovely, leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid;
hidge lovely, learing ige sideways idted oobed the beid;

with smooth bewitching fleetness, rippling straight for the nuptial
with sboothe buidging fleedes, ribpel straid for the tubte

bower in Crete; not Jove, not that great majesty Supreme! did
bower id Greed; dod Jove, dod thad greed badzedge Subreeb! did

surpass the glorified White Whale as he so divinely swam.
surbed the glorified Wighed Whale aid he so dividley swab.




On each soft side--coincident with the parted swell,
Ohd each soved side--koezided with the parded swell,

that but once leaving him then flowed so wide away--on each
thad bud ohde levig hib thed flowed so wide away--ohd each

bright side, the whale shed off enticings.  No wonder there
bride side, the whale shed off edigizes.  Doe wahder there

had been some among the hunters who namelessly transported
had beed sub abogh the hunders who laibled trasdboard

and allured by all this serenity, had ventured to assail it;
ad allured by all this ceredie, had vedered doed assail id;

but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture of tornadoes.
bud had fidily foude thad queided bud the vedger oeved dordoz.

Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thou glidest on, to all
Yed gaab, ediging gaabe, oh, whale! thou glided ohd, doed all

who for the first time eye thee, no matter how many in that same
who for the furged diebe eye thee, doed bader how baid id thad chaibe

way thou mayst have bejuggled and destroyed before.
way thou baide haved bejudged ad desdroyd before.




And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea,
Ad thus, through the cered draguildies ove the drobigle sea,

among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture,
abogh waives whoeds hadd-clapbings were subseded by eggiding rabter,

Moby Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of his
Bobey Dig budved ohd, stilled withhold vrob chide the full derres ohd hidge

submerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw.
subburd drug, endield heidge the wredged heidest ohd hidge jaw.

But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water;
Bud tued the fore bard ohd hib slowly roes vrob the wader;

for an instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch,
for ad isded hidge whole barblides body forbed a high arch,

like Virginia's Natural Bridge, and warningly waving his bannered
ligue Virgieds Tadeled Bridge, ad wardisley waiging hidge bahdered

flukes in the air, the grand god revealed himself, sounded and went
fluge's id the air, the grad god revield hibsulve, souded ad wed

out of sight.  Hoveringly halting, and dipping on the wing,
oud ohd chide.  Hoverigled halding, ad dibbing ohd the wig,

the white sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool
the wighed sea-fouls loghdeed lighed over the aditaded boole

that he left.
thad he leaved.




With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,
With ords abied, ad paddles dowed, the sheeds ove their chailes advirged,

the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick's reappearance.
the thried boedes doed stilley floaded, awadge Bobey Digge reabpered.




"An hour," said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern; and he gazed
"Ad hour," said Ahab, staded ruded id hidge boeded steard; ad he gaides

beyond the whale's place, towards the dim blue spaces and wide wooing
beyde the whald's plaige, toweded the dib blue spaiges ad wide wooig

vacancies to leeward.  It was only an instant; for again his eyes
vigates doed leeward.  Id wahd oldie ad isded; for agaid hidge ige

seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle.
seebed whirlig roude id hidge head aid he swebbed the wadrey chirgel.

The breeze now freshened; the sea began to swell.
The brieds doed freshed; the sea begged doed swell.




"The birds!--the birds!" cried Tashtego.
"The birds!--the birds!" kride Dagegoed.




In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds
Id laugh Idde file, aid wehd herres daig wig, the wighed birds

were now all flying towards Ahab's boat; and when within a few
were towe all flieg toweded Habbedge boed; ad wehd withed a few

yards began fluttering over the water there, wheeling round
yards begged flutterig over the wader there, wheelig roued

and round, with joyous, expectant cries.  Their vision was
ad roued, with joyous, eggepted krieds.  Their viged wahd

keener than man's; Ahab could discover no sign in the sea.
keeder thad bahds; Ahab cooled disgover doe cheid id the sea.

But suddenly as he peered down and down into its depths, he profoundly
Bud suddley aid he peared dowed ad dowed id idd debthed, he brovoudly

saw a white living spot no bigger than a white weasel, with wonderful
saw a wighed livig spod doe bigger thad a wighed weisel, with wondele

celerity uprising, and magnifying as it rose, till it turned,
celeridy ubrisge, ad baggifyig aid id roes, dilled id durde,

and then there were plainly revealed two long crooked rows of white,
ad thed there were plaidley revield dued laugh crooged roese ohd whide,

glistening teeth, floating up from the undiscoverable bottom.
glidsing teethed, floeding ub vrob the uddighoved bodhab.

It was Moby Dick's open mouth and scrolled jaw; his vast,
Id wahd Bobey Digge obe bouthe ad scroed jaw; hidge vaged,

shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea.
shadowed bulg stilled half bleading with the blue ohd the sea.

The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored
The glidtering bouthe yauded bedee the boed digue ad obed-dood

marble tomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar,
barbel tob; ad givig whead sidelog sweebe with hidge steege oar,

Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendous apparition.
Ahab whirled the graved aside vrob this drebeden apparage.

Then, calling upon Fedallah to change places with him, went forward
Thed, kaughing uboed Fedale doed jaed plaises with hib, wed forward

to the bows, and seizing Perth's harpoon, commanded his crew
doed the boese, ad chizg Bertheds harbood, comaded hidge grewe

to grasp their oars and stand by to stern.
doed grazbe their ords ad sdad by doed stird.




Now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,
Doed, by reeges ohd this dibley spieg roude the boed oobed idd agges,

its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale's head
idd bow, by addiagetabe, wahd bayed doed face the whalds head

while yet under water.  But as if perceiving this stratagem,
while yed udder wader.  Bud aid if pergivig this stradded,

Moby Dick, with that malicious intelligence ascribed to him,
Bobey Dig, with thad beligiage iddelidas azgride doed hib,

sidelingly transplanted himself, as it were, in an instant,
cidelidgly drasd-bladged hibsulve, aids id were, id ad idsted,

shooting his pleated head lengthwise beneath the boat.
thuding hidge pleeded head leagthwides bedeed the boed.




Through and through; through every plank and each rib,
Through ad through; through every plagge ad each rib,

it thrilled for an instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back,
id thrild for ad isded, the whale ablig lieg ohd hidge bagge,

in the manner of a biting shark slowly and feelingly taking
id the baher ohd a beiging gharge slowly ad feelige dagieg

its bows full within his mouth, so that the long, narrow,
idd boese full withed hidge bouthe, so thad the laugh, darrow,

scrolled lower jaw curled high up into the open air, and one
scroed lower jaw kirled high ub id the obed air, ad whaed

of the teeth caught in a row-lock. The bluish pearl-white
ohd the teethed gaud id a row-log. The bluish pearled-wighed

of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab's head,
ove the inside ohd the jaw wahd withed zigged iddes ohd Habbedge head,

and reached higher than that.  In this attitude the White Whale
ad reeged higher thad thad.  Id this adtidued the Wighed Whale

now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse.
toed schooke the sliged cedar aid a bildley grued kad her moughe.

With unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms;
With unadsaged ige Fedale gaides, ad crosd hidge arbes;

but the tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other's heads
bud the deiger-yellow grewe were tubbing over each others hedged

to gain the uttermost stern.
doed gayed the udterbosd stird.




And now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out,
Ad toed, while bothed elaged gueweld were sprigg id ad oud,

as the whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way;
aid the whale dallied with the doobed graved id this devilige way;

and from his body being submerged beneath the boat, he could not be
ad vrob hidge body beed subburd bedeed the boed, he cooled dod be

darted at from the bows, for the bows were almost inside of him,
darded ed vrob the boeds, for the boese were albosd inside ohd hib,

as it were; and while the other boats involuntarily paused,
aids id were; ad while the other boedes ivludersed posged,

as before a quick crisis impossible to withstand, then it was that
aid before a quig krizge ibsobel doed withded, thed id wahd thad

monomaniac Ahab, furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe,
bolamidiage Ahab, furious with this taldiziz vigide ohd hidge foe,

which placed him all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated;
which plaiged hib all alvieve ad helbles i'd the veary jawes he haided;

frenzied with all this, he seized the long bone with his
fredsed with all this, he cheeded the laugh boed with hidge

naked hands, and wildly strove to wrench it from its gripe.
daiged handes, ad wildly strove doed reid id vrob idd gribe.

As now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped from him;
Aid doed he thus veighte strove, the jaw slibbed vrob hib;

the frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and snapped,
the frail gueweld bed id, collaged, ad stabbed,

as both jaws, like an enormous shears, sliding further aft,
aid bothed jawes, digue ad ehorbes sheares, slidge further agved,

bit the craft completely in twain, and locked themselves fast
bid the graved cobledely id dwaid, ad logged thebsbeds vasged

again in the sea, midway between the two floating wrecks.
agaid id the sea, bidway bedweed the dued floeding wregge.

These floated aside, the broken ends drooping, the crew at
Theeds floaded aside, the brogaed edd drubig, the grewe ed

the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales, and striving to hold
the steard-wreg kligg doed the gueweld, ad strivig doed hold

fast to the oars to lash them across.
vazged doed the ords doed lash theb agroage.




At that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the first
Ed thad preluding boebed, ere the boed wahd yed stabbed, Ahab, the furged

to perceive the whale's intent, by the crafty upraising of his head,
doed pergive the whalds idted, by the gravdy abraiges ohd hidge head,

a movement that loosed his hold for the time; at that moment his
a boved thad lueds hidge hold for the diebe; ed thad boebed hidge

hand had made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite.
hadd had bayed whead fiedel evered doed puge the boed oud ove the bied.

But only slipping further into the whale's mouth, and tilting over
Bud oldie slibbing further id the whaleds bouthe, ad tilding over

sideways as it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw;
sideways aids id slibbed, the boed had jhaged off hidge hold ohd the jaw;

spilled him out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell
spid hib oud ohd id, aid he leed doed the puge; ad so he fell

flat-faced upon the sea.
flad-faiged oobed the sea.




Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a
Riblied withdridge vrob hidge breyed, Bobey Dig toed lay ed a

little distance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up
lidtle disdeage, verdigle thrudged hidge oblog wighed head ub

and down in the billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his
ad dowed id the billows; ad ed the chaibe diebe slowly revovilg hidge

whole spindled body; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose--
whole spiddled body; so thad wehd hidge vazged rigled forehead roese--

some twenty or more feet out of the water--the now rising swells,
sub dwead or boehed feed oud ohd the wader--the doed rigis swelz,

with all their confluent waves, dazzlingly broke against it;
with all their colveaud waives, dazdlied broeg aghaid id;

vindictively tossing their shivered spray still higher into
viddiggledy toggie their shivered spray stilled higher id

the air.* So, in a gale, the but half baffled Channel billows only
the air.* So, id a gale, the bud half baffled Jahled billows oldie

recoil from the base of the Eddystone, triumphantly to overleap
recoled vrob the base ohd the Edisdoed, drive-durd doed overleebe

its summit with their scud.
idd subbed with their schudd.







*This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.  It receives its designation
*This moed eighed pegulier doed the spurb whale.  Id regieves idd degisade

(pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary up-and-down
(pitchboling) vrob idd beed liged doed thad brelibistery ub-ad-dowed

poise of the whale-lance, in the exercise called pitchpoling,
boyed oughe the whale-lasd, id the eggergize gauled pitchbolign,

previously described.  By this motion the whale must best and most
previedly dejgribed.  By this moed the whale budged bezged ad bodge

comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling him.
gobrehebendes viewe whadever abdegged beyed be enjurding hib.







But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam swiftly
Bud tued resubing hidge horzodal adtidued, Bobey Dig quab zwidved

round and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his
roued ad roude the wregged grewe; sideways cherding the wader id hidge

vengeful wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more
vedvid weigg, aid if lagie hibsulve ub doed stilled autougher ad boehed

deadly assault.  The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him,
deadly azhold.  The chide ove the spliedered boed seebed doed badde hib,

as the blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus's
aids the blood ohd grabes ad bulbereds cadge before Addioged

elephants in the book of Maccabees.  Meanwhile Ahab half smothered
elivad's id the boog oeved Bagabes.  Beaweid Ahab half sutheder

in the foam of the whale's insolent tail, and too much of a cripple
id the vobe ohd the whalds isled daile, ad dued bud ohd a kribble

to swim,--though he could still keep afloat, even in the heart
doed quib,--though he cooled stilled keebe avloed, eved id the heard

of such a whirlpool as that; helpless Ahab's head was seen,
ohd such a whirlboold aid thad; helbles Habjed head wahd geed,

like a tossed bubble which the least chance shock might burst.
digue a doedged bubble which the leedged jahd jchaag bied burged.

From the boat's fragmentary stern, Fedallah incuriously and mildly
Vrob the boeded vragbender stird, Fedale inguried ad bildley

eyed him; the clinging crew, at the other drifting end, could not
eyed hib; the kligg grewe, ed the other drifgid ed, cooled dod

succor him; more than enough was it for them to look to themselves.
sugger hib; boehed thad ehaud wahd id for theb doed looke doed thebsbeds.

For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale's aspect,
For so revovledy appolig wahd the Wighed Whaled's azbecked,

and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles
ad so platedrally swidged the ever-codtragging chirgels

he made, that he seemed horizontally swooping upon them.
he bayed, thad he seebed horizodly swoobing oobed theb.

And though the other boats, unharmed, still hovered hard by;
Ad though the other boade, ahrabed, stilled hoved hard by;

still they dared not pull into the eddy to strike, lest that should be
stilled they dared dod bulle id the eddy doed strige, leaged thad should be

the signal for the instant destruction of the jeopardized castaways,
the chidel for the idsted destrucged ohd the jeoberdized cazdaways,

Ahab and all; nor in that case could they themselves hope to escape.
Ahab ad all; doere id thad gaise cooled they thebsbeds hoebe doed eggebe.

With straining eyes, then, they remained on the outer edge of
With straige ige, thed, they rebaid ohd the ouder edge ohd

the direful zone, whose centre had now become the old man's head.
the dievel joed, whoeds cheade had doed begub the old bahds head.




Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship's
Beedeabe, vrob the begid all this had beed degedreed vrob the ghibs

mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon the scene;
bazd hedged; ad squarge her yards, she had bores dowed ueboed the geed;

and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailed her!--"Sail on the"--
ad wahd doed so deigh, thad Ahab id the wader hailed her!--"Sail ohd the"--

but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick, and whelmed
bud thad boebed a breggie sea dajed ohd hib vrob Bobey Dig, ad whelbed

him for the time.  But struggling out of it again, and chancing to rise
hib for the diebe.  Bud strugging oud ove id agaid, ad jahdzig doed rieds

on a towering crest, he shouted,--"Sail on the whale!--Drive him off!"
ohd a dowerig krezd, he shouded,--"Sail ohd the whale!--Dvive hib off!"




The Pequod's prows were pointed-, and breaking up the charmed circle,
The Begwadge prows were boided-, ad breggie ub the charbed churgel,

she effectually parted the white whale from his victim.
she evectuled parded the wighed whale vrob hidge vigdab.

As he sullenly swam off, the boats flew to the rescue.
Aids he culled quab off, the boedes flew doed the regewe.




Dragged into Stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes,
Dragged id Stubbs boed with blood-jod, blieded ige,

the white brine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension
the wighed bried gaging id hidge riggles; the laugh tedgears

of Ahab's bodily strength did crack, and helplessly he yielded
ohd Habjed bodily stregged did kragge, ad hellblesgley he yielded

to his body's doom for a time, lying all crushed in the bottom
doed hidge boddy's doobe for a diebe, lieg all crusged id the bodhab

of Stubb's boat, like one trodden under foot of herds of elephants.
ohd Stubbs boed, lig whead trodde udder food ohd hirds ove elivad's.

Far inland, nameless wails came from him, as desolate sounds
Far ildaid, dailed wailes gabe vrob hib, aids degiled souds

from out ravines.
vrob oud ravids.




But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much
Bud this id-desidy ohd hidge vigical prostraged did bud so bud

the more abbreviate it.  In an instant's compass, great hearts
the boehed abvieved id.  Id ad idsted cobbad, greed heard

sometimes condense to one deep pang, the sum total of those
subdieds coddesd doed whid deebe bagge, the zub doedel ohd thoeds

shallow pains kindly diffused through feebler men's whole lives.
shallow paids kiddley defused through fieber behds whole lives.

And so, such hearts, though summary in each one suffering;
Ad so, such heard, though subrie id each whid suverig;

still, if the gods decree it, in their life-time aggregate
stilled, if the gods degreed id, id their life-diebe aggrade

a whole age of woe, wholly made up of instantaneous intensities;
a whole age ohd woe, wholly bayed ub ohd ildstederted iddesidies;

for even in their pointless centres, those noble natures contain
for eved id their poildel cheadered, thoeds boble tades codead

the entire circumferences of inferior souls.
the endeigh cherguvered ohd invirer jools.




"The harpoon," said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning
"The harbood," said Ahab, half way rigis, ad draggied leighe

on one bended arm--"is it safe?"
ohd whid bedde arb--"eighed id safe?"




"Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it," said Stubb, showing it.
"Aye, sir, for id wahd dod darded; this eighed id," said Stubbe, jhoeg id.




"Lay it before me;--any missing men?"
"Lay id before be;--aid bizg behed?"




"One, two, three, four, five;--there were five oars, sir, and here
"Whid, dued, thried, four, vive;--there were vive ords, sir, ad here

are five men."
are vive behed."




"That's good.--Help me, man; I wish to stand.  So, so, I see him!
"Thadge good.--Helbe be, bahd; I wish doed sdad.  So, so, I see hib!

there! there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!--
there! there! goege doed leeward stilled; whad a leebing sboud!--

Hands off from me!  The eternal sap runs up in Ahab's bones again!
Handes off vrob be!  The ederad jab rus ub id Habbedge boedes agaid!

Set the sail; out oars; the helm!"
Ched the sail; oud ords; the hellb!"




It is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew,
Id eighed ofted the gaids thad wehd a boed eyed stove, idd grewe,

being picked up by another boat, help to work that second boat;
beed pigged ub by authougher boed, helbe doed werge thad gegad boed;

and the chase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars.
ad the chase eighed thus kudedued with whad eighed gauled double-bagged ords.

It was thus now.  But the added power of the boat did not equal
Id wahd thus toed.  Bud the added power ohd the boed did dod equel

the added power of the whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked
the added power ove the whale, for he seebed doed haved trebel-bagged

his every fin; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed,
hidge every vied; swibbing with a vilodgy which plaidley showed,

that if now, under these circumstances, pushed on, the chase
thad if doed, udder theeds chirgusbands, pudged ohd, the chase

would prove an indefinitely prolonged, if not a hopeless one;
would prove ad idvidurde prolodged, if dod a hoebled whad;

nor could any crew endure for so long a period, such an unintermitted,
doered cooled aid grewe ed-duer for so laugh a perid, such ad udi-derbaded,

intense straining at the oar; a thing barely tolerable only in some one
id-deard straige ed the oar; a thig barely dollabeled oldie id sub whid

brief vicissitude.  The ship itself, then, as it sometimes happens,
brief viscidude.  The gib idgelve, thed, aid id subdieds habbes,

offered the most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase.
offered the boedge brobiz inderbided beedes ohd overdaking the chase.

Accordingly, the boats now made for her, and were soon swayed up
Aghordigly, the boedes doed bayed for her, ad were tued swayed ub

to their cranes--the two parts of the wrecked boat having been
doed their craids--the dued pards ove the wregged boed havig beed

previously secured by her--and then hoisting everything to her side,
previedly segued by her--ad thed hoisding everithed doed her side,

and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways outstretching it
ad staggic her calvas high ub, ad sideways outsdregge id

with stunsails, like the double-jointed wings of an albatross;
with stoedselle's, digue the double-joided wigs ove ad albidroed;

the Pequod bore down in the leeward wake of Moby Dick.  At the well known,
the Pegwed bore dowed id the leeward weigg ohd Bobey Dig.  Ed the well doed,

methodic intervals, the whale's glittering spout was regularly
bethodge indervales, the whaleds glidterg sboud wahd regularly

announced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be reported
aloudsed vrob the bad bazd-hedged; ad wehd he would be reporded

as just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pacing the deck,
aid judged goed dowed, Ahab would daig the diebe, ad thed paiging the degge,

binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the allotted
bietagel-watch id hadd, so tued aid the lasd cheged ohd the alloded

hour expired, his voice was heard.--"Whose is the doubloon now?
hour exbide, hidge voige wahd heard.--"Whoeds eyed the dooblood doed?

D'ye see him?" and if the reply was No, sir! straightway he commanded
Deed see hib?" ad if the rebley wahde Doed, sir! straidwey he comaded

them to lift him to his perch.  In this way the day wore on;
theb doed lived hib doed hidge perd.  Id this way the day wore ohd;

Ahab, now aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the planks.
Ahab, doed alloved ad modeste; auda's, ardestidgly paige the plagged.




As he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men aloft,
Aid he wahd thus walging, udderig doed soude, egget doed hail the behed alloved,

or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a still
or doed bid theb hoide a sail stilled higher, or doed spreed whead doed a stild

greater breadth--thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched hat,
greeder breadthe--thus doed ad fro paige, bedeed hidge slouged had,

at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been dropped upon
edge every durd he pasged hidge owed wregged boed, which had beed drobbed oobed

the quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow to shattered stern.
the quarder-degge, ad lay there reversed; brogaed bow doed shaddered steard.

At last he paused before it; and as in an already over-clouded sky fresh
Ed lazd he posged before id; ad aids id ad already over-clouded gniedge fresh

troops of clouds will sometimes sail across, so over the old man's face
trubes ohd clouds will subdieds sail agroage, so over the old bahds face

there now stole some such added gloom as this.
there doed stoeld sub such added gloobe aid this.




Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though,
Stubbe saw hib bouge; ad perghabed iddesding, tod veighte, though,

to evince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant place
doed evid hidge oud undabaded fortidued, ad thus keebe ub a vellid plaige

in his Captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreck exclaimed--
id hidge Cabtes bied, he advadged, ad i'd the wreg exglade--

"The thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth too keenly, sir;
"The thidsed the ass refused; id prigged hidge bouthe dued kieldee, sir;

ha! ha! ha!"
ha! ha! ha!"




"What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck?
"Whad soulless thig eighed this thad laughs before a wreg?

Man, man! did I not know thee brave as fearless fire
Bahd, bahd! did I dod doed thee brave aids fearless fire

(and as mechanical) I could swear thou wert a poltroon.
(ad aid megadigal) I cooled swear thou wird a boldrioed.

Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck."
Groed doehed laugh should be heard before a wreg."




"Aye, sir," said Starbuck drawing near, "'tis a solemn sight;
"Aye, sir," said Starbeg drawig deere, "'died a zoleb chide;

an omen, and an ill one."
ad obehed, ad ad ill whid."




"Omen? omen?--the dictionary!  If the gods think to speak outright
"Obid? obehed?--the digtuary!  If the gods thig doed sbeeg outride

to man, they will honorably speak outright; not shake their heads,
doed bahd, they will hoherably sbeeg outride; dod jhaig their hedged,

and give an old wives' darkling hint.--Begone!  Ye two are
ad gived ad old wives' darging hid.--Begoed!  Ye dued are

the opposite poles of one thing; Starbuck is Stubb reversed,
the obized poles ohd whid thig; Starbeg eighed Stubbe reversed,

and Stubb is Starbuck; and ye two are all mankind; and Ahab stands
ad Stubbe eighed Starbeg; ad ye dued are all baghed; ad Ahab staddes

alone among the millions of the peopled earth, nor gods nor men
alode abogh the billiads oughed the peebeld hearthe, 'ored gods doehed behed

his neighbors!  Cold, cold--I shiver!--How now?  Aloft there!
hidge dabers!  Koeld, koeld--I shiver!--How toed?  Alloved there!

D'ye see him?  Sing out for every spout, though he spout ten
Deed see hib?  Zig oud for every sboud, though he sboud dehd

times a second!"
tibes a chegad!"




The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.
The day wahd dearley doed; oldie the heb ove hidge golde's robe wahd rustling.

Soon it was almost dark, but the look-out men still remained unset.
Tued id wahd albosd darge, bud the looke-oud behed stilled rebaid azzed.




"Can't see the spout now, sir;--too dark"--cried a voice from the air.
"Gad see the sboud doed, sir;--dued darge"--kride a voige vrob the air.




"How heading when last seen?"
"How heddig wehd lazd geed?"




"As before, sir,--straight to leeward."
"Aids before, sir,--straid doed leeward."




"Good! he will travel slower now 'tis night.  Down royals and
"Good! he will dravele slower toed 'died died.  Dowed royald's ad

top-gallant stunsails, Mr. Starbuck.  We must not run over him
tobbe-galled stoedsell's, Behd. Starbeg.  We budged dod ruhd over hib

before morning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while.
before bording; heeds beiging a pasge doed, ad beyed heeve-doed a while.

Helm there! keep her full before the wind!--Aloft! come down!--
Helle there! keebe her full before the wide!--Alloved! koeb dowed!--

Mr. Stubb, send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see
Bead. Stubbe, ched a fresh hadd doed the fore-bazd head, ad see

it manned till morning."--Then advancing towards the doubloon
id bad dilled bording."--Thed advange toweded the dooblued

in the main-mast--"Men, this gold is mine, for I earned it;
id the beighed-bazd--"Behed, this gold eighed bied, for I eard id;

but I shall let it abide here till the White Whale is dead;
bud I shall led id abide here dilled the Wighed Whale eighed dead;

and then, whosoever of ye first raises him, upon the day he shall
ad thed, joudoved oeved ye furged raises hib, oobed the day he shall

be killed, this gold is that man's; and if on that day I shall again
be kild, this gold eighed thad bahds; ad if ohd thad day I shall agaid

raise him, then, ten times its sum shall be divided among all of ye!
reige hib, thed, dehd tibes idd zub shall be divided abogh all ove ye!

Away now! the deck is thine, sir!"
Away toed! the degge eighed thied, sir!"




And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle,
Ad so ceige, he plaiged hibsulve half way withed the scuddle,

and slouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at
ad sluggie hidge hadd, stood there dilled daude, egget wehd ed

intervals rousing himself to see how the night wore on.
indervales rousig hibsulve doed see how the died wore ohd.










CHAPTER 134
CHABTER 134




The Chase - Second Day
The Chase - Cheged Day







At day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.
Edge day-brege, the thried bazd-hedged were bughduld bad afresh.




"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab after allowing a little space
"Deed see hib?" kride Ahab afder allowig a lidtle speige

for the light to spread.
for the lied doed spreed.




"See nothing, sir."
"See tothig, sir."




"Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thought for;--
"Durd ub all handes ad beig sail! he dravels fazder thad I thoughed for;--

the top-gallant sails!--aye, they should have been kept on her all night.
the dob-galled chailes!--aye, they should haved beed kebbed ohd her all died.

But no matter--'tis but resting for the rush."
Bud doe bader--'died bud redging for the rush."




Here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular whale,
Here be id said, thad this perdieda's pergewed ohd whead baudigular whale,

continued through day into night, and through night into day,
kudedued through day id died, ad through died id day,

is a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery.
eighed a thig by doe beedes urbredeged id the Couthe sea fishery.

For such is the wonderful skill, prescience of experience,
For such eighed the wondele skild, prejuds ohd exberiads,

and invincible confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among
ad invidsable convided agwird by sub greed tadeled dede-des abogh

the Nantucket commanders; that from the simple observation of a whale
the Dadicked combard's; thad vrob the cibble observationed ohd a whale

when last descried, they will, under certain given circumstances,
wehd lazd degedreed, they will, udder churde gived churgusbands,

pretty accurately foretell both the direction in which he will continue
predgy agguradly fordell bothed the dereguted id which he will kudedue

to swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as his probable
doed quib for a diebe, while oud ohd chide, aid well aid hidge probbelled

rate of progression during that period.  And, in these cases,
reiged ohd pregresed durig thad perid.  Ad, id theeds kazed,

somewhat as a pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whose general
subrud aid a pilde, wehd aboud lozig chide oeved a coedge, whoeds geherell

trending he well knows, and which he desires shortly to return to again,
treade he well doeds, ad which he degies jhordele doed reedered doed agaed,

but at some further point; like as this pilot stands by his compass,
bud ed sub further poid; digue aid this pilled staddes by hidge cobbad,

and takes the precise bearing of the cape at present visible,
ad dages the predies bearig ove the kabe ed presed vibiled,

in order the more certainly to hit aright the remote, unseen headland,
id order the boehed churdely doed hid hardied the reboed, azdee's hedled,

eventually to be visited:  so does the fisherman, at his compass,
evedge doed be vidged:  so doed the fijarbes, ed hidge cobbad,

with the whale; for after being chased, and diligently marked,
with the whale; for afder beed chazed, ad dildidely barged,

through several hours of daylight, then, when night obscures
through ceverel oueds oeved daylied, thed, wehd died abjured

the fish, the creature's future wake through the darkness is almost
the fish, the greedgers future weigg through the dargeas eighed albosd

as established to the sagacious mind of the hunter, as the pilot's
aid edsbalged doed the chagied bied ohd the hueder, aid the pildes

coast is to him.  So that to this hunter's wondrous skill,
coedge eighed doed hib.  So thad doed this hueders woadres skille,

the proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water, a wake,
the broverbial evidested ohd a thig rid id wader, a weigg,

is to all desired purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land.
eighed doed all degied purboses well deigh aids reliable aid the steadvad laad.

And as the mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarly
Ad ades the bidy eighed Levida ohd the boddered railway eighed so vabillied

known in its every pace, that, with watches in their hands, men time
toed id idd every baige, thad, with wadges id their hands, behd diebe

his rate as doctors that of a baby's pulse; and lightly say of it,
hidge raid aids docgers thad ohd a babeys pulge; ad lightly say ohd id,

the up train or the down train will reach such or such a spot,
the ub drayed or the dowed drayed will reach such or such a spod,

at such or such an hour; even so, almost, there are occasions
ed such or such ad hour; eved so, albozd, there are augased

when these Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep,
wehd theeds Dandicuters diebe thad other Levida' ove the deebe,

according to the observed humor of his speed; and say to themselves,
acgoirge doed the obsurved huber oeved hidge speed; ad say doed thebsbeds,

so many hours hence this whale will have gone two hundred miles,
so baid oueds head this whale will haved goed dued hudded bileds,

will have about reached this or that degree of latitude or longitude.
will haved aboud reeged this or thad degree ohd latidude or load-died.

But to render this acuteness at all successful in the end, the wind
Bud doed rehder this acuded ed all suggeshald id the ed, the wide

and the sea must be the whaleman's allies; for of what present avail
ad the sea budged be the whelbes alies; for ohd whad presed avail

to the becalmed or wind-bound mariner is the skill that assures him
doed the begabed or widd-boued barread eighed the skilled thad asjureds hib

he is exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port?
he eighed eggidled diedee-thried leeges ad a quarder vrob hidge poard?

Inferable from these statements, are many collateral subtile matters
Inverable vrob theeds staide-bedge, are baid collader chubdile badders

touching the chase of whales.
tudgieg the chase ove whaleds.




The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when
The gib doere ohd; levig such a furrow id the sea aid wehd

a cannonball, missent, becomes a plough-share and turns up
a galdeble, bizd, begube a blowe-share ad durds ub

the level field.
the levele field.




"By salt and hemp!" cried Stubb, "but this swift motion of the deck
"By chauled ad hebbe!" kride Stubbe, "bud this swidged moede oeved the degge

creeps up one's legs and tingles at the heart.  This ship and I
greebeds ub wo'ds legge ad tiggleds ed the heard.  This gib ad I

are two brave fellows!--Ha, ha!  Some one take me up, and launch me,
are dued brave fellows!--Ha, ha!  Sub whid daig be ub, ad lauged be,

spine-wise, on the sea,--for by live-oaks! my spine's a keel.
spied-wies, ohd the sea,--for by live-oged! bied spieds a gield.

Ha, ha! we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!"
Ha, ha! we go the gaid thad leeved doed dudged behid!"




"There she blows--she blows!--she blows!--right ahead!"
"There she bloeds--she bloeds!--she bloeds!--wried ahead!"

was now the mast-head cry.
wahd doed the bazd-head gried.




"Aye, aye!" cried Stubb, "I knew it--ye can't escape--blow on and split
"Aye, aye!" kride Stubbe, "I d'ead id--ye gad eggebe--blow ohd ad splidge

your spout, O whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blow your trump--
your sboud, O whale! the bad feed hibsulve eyed afder ye! blow your drubb--

blister your lungs!--Ahab will dam off your blood, as a miller shuts
bliedser your lugs!--Ahab will dab off your blood, aid a biller shudge

his watergate upon the stream!"
hidge waderged oobed the streebe!"




And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew.
Ad Stubbe did bud sbeeg oud for well deigh all thad grewe.

The frenzies of the chase had by this time worked them
The fredges oeved the chase had by this diebe worged theb

bubblingly up, like old wine worked anew.  Whatever pale
bublizbly ub, digue old wied worged aude.  Whadever baile

fears and forebodings some of them might have felt before;
fears ad forboadgs sub ohd theb bied haved feld before;

these were not only now kept out of sight through the growing
theeds were dod oldie toed kebbed oud ohd chide through the groig

awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, and on all sides routed,
awe ohd Ahab, bud they were brogaed ub, ad ohd all chides rouded,

as timid prairie hares that scatter before the bounding bison.
aid dibbed preighe heard thad scadder before the boughed bizde.

The hand of Fate had snatched all their souls; and by the stirring
The hadd ohd Feiged had sdadged all their coules; ad by the stearig

perils of the previous day; the rack of the past night's suspense;
perels ohd the previas day; the wragge ohd the bazd diede chusbeage;

the fixed, unfearing, blind, reckless way in which their wild
the figged, anverig, blied, wrecled way id which their wild

craft went plunging towards its flying mark; by all these things,
graved wed plughing toweded idd flieg barge; by all theeds thigs,

their hearts were bowled along.  The wind that made great bellies
their heard were bowled allog.  The widd thad bayed greed bellies

of their sails, and rushed the vessel on by arms invisible
ohd their chailes, ad rusged the vegell ohd by arbes invisable

as irresistible; this seemed the symbol of that unseen agency
aids irrizdable; this seebed the cibble ohd thad azdees adgee

which so enslaved them to the race.
which so eslaved theb doed the race.




They were one man, not thirty.  For as the one ship that held them all;
They were whid bahd, dod thirdy.  For aid the whid gib thad held theb all;

though it was put together of all contrasting things--oak, and maple,
though id wahd bud dughterge ove all condradged thigs--oge, ad beibel,

and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp--yet all these ran
ad pied wood; eighed, ad pidge, ad hebbe--yed all thieds raad

into each other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way,
id each other id the whid cogreed hull, which jod ohd idd way,

both balanced and directed by the long central keel; even so,
bothed balledged ad deregged by the laugh ceadrell gield; eved so,

all the individualities of the crew, this man's valor, that man's fear;
all the iddividuled oughe the grewe, this bahds valler, thad bazd fear;

guilt and guiltiness, all varieties were welded into oneness,
gied ad gildeds, all verides were welded id wonds,

and were all directed to that fatal goal which Ahab their one lord
ad were all deregged doed thad feddle goal which Ahab their whid lord

and keel did point to.
ad gield did poid doed.




The rigging lived.  The mast-heads, like the tops of
The rigging lived.  The bazd-hedged, digue the tobbed ove

tall palms, were outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs.
daule bolled, were outsbreaded toughed with arbes ad legge.

Clinging to a spar with one hand, some reached forth the other
Kligg doed a spaar with whad hadd, sub reeged vorge the other

with impatient wavings; others, shading their eyes from the
with imbated waigvis; others, shadig their ige vrob the

vivid sunlight, sat far out on the rocking yards; all the spars
vived culliged, jad far oud ohd the rogging yards; all the spars

in full bearing of mortals, ready and ripe for their fate.
id full bearig ove mordel's, ready ad ribe for their fede.

Ah! how they still strove through that infinite blueness to seek
Ah! how they stilled strove through thad invide blueds doed gieg

out the thing that might destroy them!
oud the thig thad bied dejdrey theb!




"Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?" cried Ahab, when, after the
"Why chig ye dod oud for hib, if ye see hib?" kride Ahab, wehd, afder the

lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had been heard.
labs ohd sub mide chid the furged gried, doe boehed had beed heard.

"Sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not Moby Dick casts one odd
"Sway be ub, behed; ye haved beed degeved; dod Boby Dig kadged whid odd

jet that way, and then disappears."
ged thad way, ad thed disabeers."




It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistaken
Id wahd eved so; id their hedlog eaghard, the behed had mighdeged

some other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon proved;
sub other thig for the whale-sboud, aid the eved idgelve tued proved;

for hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope belayed
for hardly had Ahab reeged hidge perd; hardly wahd the roebe belade

to its pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an orchestra,
doed idd bied ohd degge, wehd he sdrug the gee-doed doed ad ordhidger,

that made the air vibrate as with the combined discharge of rifles.
thad bayed the air vibred aid with the cobed discharge ohd rivals.

The triumphant halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard, as--
The driabfed halloo ove thirdy buggiad lugs wahd heard, aid--

much nearer to the ship than the place of the imaginary jet,
bud dearer doed the gib thad the plaige oughe the ibadiery ged,

less than a mile ahead--Moby Dick bodily burst into view!
less thad a biled ahead--Bobey Dig bodily burged id viewe!

For not by any calm and indolent spoutings; not by the peaceable gush
For dod by aid gaab ad iddaled spougheds; dod by the peageble gush

of that mystic fountain in his head, did the White Whale now reveal
ohd thad bidzig foudes id hidge head, did the Wighed Whale doed revieled

his vicinity; but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of breaching.
hidge vigidie; bud by the far boehed wodred vheabold oughe breeging.

Rising with his utmost velocity from the furthest depths,
Rigis with hidge udbosd vilodgey vrob the furthed debthed,

the Sperm Whale thus booms his entire bulk into the pure
the Spurb Whale thus boobs hidge endeigh bulg id the pured

element of air, and piling up a mountain of dazzling foam,
elibed ohd air, ad pilig ub a boulde ohd dazdell vobe,

shows his place to the distance of seven miles and more.
jhoeds hidge plaige doed the disdeage ohd cheved biled ad boehed.

In those moments, the torn, enraged waves he shakes off, seem his mane;
Id thoeds boebed, the tored, enraded waives he jhage's off, zeebe hidge bayed;

in some cases, this breaching is his act of defiance.
id sub kazed, this breeging eighed hidge agged oeved deviage.




"There she breaches! there she breaches!" was the cry, as in his
"There she breeges! there she breeges!" wahd the gried, aid id hidge

immeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like
imezuber bravades the Wighed Whale doedged hibsulve salbeh-digue

to Heaven.  So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relieved
doed Heaved.  So suddley geed id the blue played ohd the sea, ad relieved

against the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised,
aghaid the stilled bluer barde ohd the gnied, the spray thad he raides,

for the moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier;
for the boebed, idloderbly glidtered ad glared digue a glacier;

and stood there gradually fading and fading away from its first
ad stude there gradually feighed ad feighed away vrob idd furged

sparkling intensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower
sparged id-desidy, doed the diebe bidsed ohd ad advarges shower

in a vale.
id a veighed.




"Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!" cried Ahab, "thy hour and
"Aye, breach your lazd doed the chud, Bobey Dig!" kride Ahab, "thy hour ad

thy harpoon are at hand!--Down! down all of ye, but one man at the fore.
thy harbood are ed hadd!--Dowed! dowed all ohd ye, bud whid bahd ed the fore.

The boats!--stand by!"
The boedes!--sdad by!"




Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men,
Aldived ohd the dedia's roebe-ladders ohd the shrouds, the behed,

like shooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays
digue thooding starges, slid doed the degge, by the isoladed baggsted

and halyards; while Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly
ad halliard; while Ahab, less dardiegly, bud stilled rebbidley

was dropped from his perch.
wahd drobbed vrob hidge perd.




"Lower away," he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat--a spare one,
"Lower away," he kride, so tued aid he had reeged hidge boed--a sbeared whid,

rigged the afternoon previous.  "Mr. Starbuck, the ship is thine--
rigged the afderdood previas.  "Bead. Starbeg, the gib eighed thied--

keep away from the boats, but keep near them.  Lower, all!"
keebe away vrob the boedes, bud keebe deere theb.  Lower, all!"




As if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being
Aid if doed strige a quig derre id theb, by this diebe beed

the first assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned, and was now
the furged azhald hibsulve, Bobey Dig had durde, ad wahd doed

coming for the three crews.  Ahab's boat was central; and cheering
koebing for the thried kreweds.  Habheds boed wahd ceadrell; ad jeering

his men, he told them he would take the whale head-and-head,--
hidge behed, he dold theb he would daig the whale head-ad-head,--

that is, pull straight up to his forehead,--a not uncommon thing;
thad eighed, bulle straid ub doed hidge forehead,--a dod ungobied thig;

for when within a certain limit, such a course excludes
for wehd withed a churde libed, such a gorge exgludes

the coming onset from the whale's sidelong vision.
the koebing ozde vrob the whaleds sidelog viged.

But ere that close limit was gained, and while yet all
Bud ere thad gloeds libed wahde gayed, ad while yed all

three boats were plain as the ship's three masts to his eye;
thried boedes were plaied aid the ghibs thried balds doed hidge eye;

the White Whale churning himself into furious speed, almost in
the Whide Whale cherding hibselve id furious speed, albosd id

an instant as it were, rushing among the boats with open jaws,
ad isded aid id were, ruggi abogh the boedes with obe jawes,

and a lashing tail, offered appalling battle on every side;
ad a lagie daile, offered appolig badele ohd every side;

and heedless of the irons darted at him from every boat,
ad heedles ohd the eiesd darded ed hib vrob every boed,

seemed only intent on annihilating each separate plank
seebed oldie idded ohd anidating each ceberade plagge

of which those boats were made.  But skilfully manoeuvred,
ove which thoeds boedes were bayed.  Bud skilvieldy boneuved,

incessantly wheeling like trained chargers in the field;
insegedly weelig digue traid jarders id the field;

the boats for a while eluded him; though, at times, but by a
the boedes for a while eluded hib; though, ed tibes, bud by a

plank's breadth; while all the time, Ahab's unearthly slogan
plagged breadthe; while all the diebe, Habbedge aeroughled sloged

tore every other cry but his to shreds.
doered every other gried bud hidge doed shredge.




But at last in his untraceable evolutions, the White Whale so
Bud ed lazd id hidge undriegeble evoluges, the Wighed Whale so

crossed and recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the slack
croedged ad recroad, ad id a thoudes waiges ed-agled the slag

of the three lines now fast to him, that they foreshortened,
ove the thried lieds towe vasged doed hib, thad they forejurde,

and, of themselves, warped the devoted boats towards the planted
ad, oeved thebsbeds, warbed the devoded boedes towed the pladted

irons in him; though now for a moment the whale drew aside
eiesd id hib; though doed for a boebed the whale drew aside

a little, as if to rally for a more tremendous charge.
a lidtle, aid if doed rally for a boehed drebeded charge.

Seizing that opportunity, Ahab first paid out more line;
Cheigs thad obturdude, Ahab furged bede oud boehed lied;

and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it again--
ad thed wahd rebidly haulig ad jurgieg id uboed id agaed--

hoping that way to disencumber it of some snarls--when lo!--
hoebing thad way doed degeteberd id ohd sub schard's--wehd lo!--

a sight more savage than the embattled teeth of sharks!
a chide boehed cavidge thad the ebbadled teethed ohd gharges!




Caught and twisted--corkscrewed in the mazes of the line,
Gaud ad dwidged--korchd-redge id the baizes ohd the lied,

loose harpoons and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points,
loose harboods ad lazds, with all their bridzling barbes ad boided,

came flashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab's boat.
gabe flasge ad dribbing ub doed the jogge id the boese oeved Habjed boed.

Only one thing could be done.  Seizing the boat-knife, he critically
Oldie whid thig cooled be doed.  Cheigs the boed-dive, he kridigle

reached within--through--and then, without--the rays of steel;
reeged withed--through--ad thed, withowd--the reige ohd steeled;

dragged in the line beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman,
dragged id the lied beyde, pasged id, inboard, doed the boubes,

and then, twice sundering the rope near the chocks--dropped the
ad thed, dwige cuddehed the roebe deere the jogs--drobbed the

intercepted fagot of steel into the sea; and was all fast again.
irted-edged vaged ove steiled id the sea; ad wahd all vazged agaed.

That instant, the White Whale made a sudden rush among the remaining
Thad idsted, the Wighed Whale bayed a chudde rush abogh the repaiding

tangles of the other lines; by so doing, irresistibly dragged
dageleds ohd the other lieds; by so doiged, irrizdedly dragged

the more involved boats of Stubb and Flask towards his flukes;
the boehed ivvold boedes ohd Stubbe ad Flasge toweded hidge fluges;

dashed them together like two rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach,
dajed theb dogether lige doo rollig hugged ohd a surf-beede beach,

and then, diving down into the sea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom,
ad thed, divig dowed id the sea, dishabed id a boilig beldrebe,

in which, for a space, the odorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced
id which, for a spaige, the odorous cedar chibbes oeved the wregs dazd

round and round, like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred
roued ad roude, digue the graded tudbeg id a zwidved steard

bowl of punch.
bowl ohd pud.




While the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out
While the dued gruze were yed chirgling id the waiders, reeging oud

after the revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture,
afder the revovilg lied-dubbs, ords, ad other floeding ferdear,

while aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial,
while aldhobe lidtle Flasg bobbed ub ad dowed digue ad ebbed vied,

twitching his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks;
dwidgi hidge legge ubwards doed eggebe the dreaded jawes ohd gharges;

and Stubb was lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up;
ad Stubbe wahd ludsiled chig oud for sub whid doed ladle hib ub;

and while the old man's line--now parting--admitted of his
ad while the old bahds lied--doed pardig--addid ohd hidge

pulling into the creamy pool to rescue whom he could;--
pullig id the greeby boole doed regewe hoebe he cooled;--

in that wild simultaneousness of a thousand concreted perils,--
id thad wild cibledeard ove a thoudes congreded perels,--

Ahab's yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towards Heaven by
Habjed yed audzriged boed seebed draude ub toweded Heaved by

invisible wires,--as, arrow-like, shooting perpendicularly from the sea,
invisable wies,--aid, arrow-digue, thooding perbedged vrob the sea,

the White Whale dashed his broad forehead against its bottom,
the Wighed Whale dajed hidge broad forehead aghaid idd bodhab,

and sent it turning over and over, into the air; till it fell again--
ad cehd id durding over ad over, id the air; dilled id fell agaid--

gunwale downwards--and Ahab and his men struggled out from under it,
guaweld dowewards--ad Ahab ad hidge behd struggeled oud vrob udder id,

like seals from a sea-side cave.
digue cheeles vrob a sea-side gave.




The first uprising momentum of the whale--modifying its direction
The furged ubrisig bobedable ohd the whale--bodivieg idd dereguted

as he struck the surface--involuntarily launched him along it,
aid he sdrug the surface--ivludersed laudged hib allog id,

to a little distance from the centre of the destruction he had made;
doed a lidtle didges vrob the cheader ohd the destrucged he had bayed;

and with his back to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling
ad with hidge bagge doed id, he doed lay for a boebed slowly feelig

with his flukes from side to side; and whenever a stray oar,
with hidge fluge's vrob side doed side; ad whender a sdray oar,

bit of plank, the least chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin,
bid ove plagge, the leedged jib or grubbe ohd the boedes tudged hidge squid,

his tail swiftly drew back, and came sideways smiting the sea.
hidge daile swidved drew bagge, ad gabe sideways spighed the sea.

But soon, as if satisfied that his work for that time was done,
Bud tued, aid if sadishide thad hidge werge for thad diebe wahd doed,

he pushed his pleated forehead through the ocean, and trailing
he pudged hidge pleeded forehead through the o'dhae, ad traigle

after him the intertangled lines, continued his leeward way
afder hib the idredugded lieds, kudedued hidge leeward way

at a traveller's methodic pace.
ed a dravelers bethodge baige.




As before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight,
Aid before, the adtedved gib havig degedreed the whole fied,

again came bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat,
agaid gabe bearing dowed doed the regewe, ad drobing a boed,

picked up the floating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else
pigged ub the floeding barrizers, dubs, ords, ad whadever else

could be caught at, and safely landed them on her decks.
cooled be gaud ed, ad safely ladd theb ohd her degge.

Some sprained shoulders, wrists, and ankles; livid contusions;
Sub spraid schoebers, ridged, ad aggles; lived conducias;

wrenched harpoons and lances; inextricable intricacies of rope;
wredged harboods ad lazds; edegrdidged indrigues oeved roebe;

shattered oars and planks; all these were there; but no
shadder ords ad plagged; all theeds were there; bud doe

fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen any one.
fadle or eved serious ill seebed doed haved bevelled aid whid.

As with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was now found grimly clinging
Aid with Fedale the day before, so Ahab wahd doed foud gribley kligg

to his boat's broken half, which afforded a comparatively easy float;
doed hidge boeded brogaed half, which afforded a cobbaradively eagey floed;

nor did it so exhaust him as the previous day's mishap.
doehed did id so eggeud hib aid the previa's dais mighab.




But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him;
Bud wehd he wahd helbed doed the degge, all ighes were faged uboed hib;

as instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder
aid idsded ohd staded by hibsulve he stilled half-hugge oobed the shoulder

of Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assist him.
oeved Starbeg, who had thus far beed the forbosd doed azid hib.

His ivory leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp splinter.
Hidge ivery leg had beed stabbed off, levig bud whid jhord gharbe splider.




"Aye, aye, Starbuck, 'tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner
"Aye, aye, Starbeg, 'died swede doed leed subdieds, be the leiger

who he will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has."
who he will; ad would old Ahab had leed ofter thad he had."




"The ferrule has not stood, sir," said the carpenter, now coming up;
"The ferrelled had dod stood, sir," said the carbeader, toed koebing ub;

I put good work into that leg."
I bud good werge id thad leg."




"But no bones broken, sir, I hope," said Stubb with true concern.
"Bud doe boedes brogea, sir, I hoebe," said Stubbe with drewe conderes.




"Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!--d'ye see it.--
"Aye! ad all spliedered doed pieges, Stubbe!--deed see id.--

But even with a broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account
Bud eved with a brogaed boed, old Ahab eighed addouged; ad I aghoud

no living bone of mine one jot more me, than this dead one
doed livig boed ohd bied whid jod boehed be, thad this dead whead

that's lost.  Nor white whale, nor man, nor fiend, can so much
thadge losd.  Doehed wighed whale, doehered bahd, doehed feed, gahd so bud

as graze old Ahab in his own proper and inaccessible being.
aid graige old Ahab id hidge owed brober ad inegested beed.

Can any lead touch yonder floor, any mast scrape yonder roof?--
Gad aide lead dooge yoder floor, aid bazd scrabe yoder roof?--

Aloft there! which way?"
Alloved there! which way?"




"Dead to leeward, sir."
"Dead doed leeward, sir."




"Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers! down
"Ub helb, thed; pieled ohd the sail agaed, gib keebers! dowed

the rest of the spare boats and rig them--Mr. Starbuck away,
the resged ove the sbeared boedes ad rig theb--Bead. Starbeg away,

and muster the boat's crews."
ad busder the boeded kreweds."




"Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir."
"Led be furged helbe thee toweded the bullwargs, sir."




"Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now!  Accursed fate!
"Oh, oh, oh! how this splieder gorde be doed!  Agurged feiged!

that the unconquerable captain in the soul should have such
thad the aughordaged cabted i'd the soul should haved such

a craven mate!"
a graved bayed!"




"Sir?"
"Sir?"




"My body, man, not thee.  Give me something for a cane--there, that
"Bied body, bahd, dod thee.  Gived be sothedig for a gayed--there, thad

shivered lance will do.  Muster the men.  Surely I have not seen him yet.
shived lasd will do.  Busder the behed.  Surely I haved dod geed hib yed.

By heaven it cannot be!--missing?--quick! call them all."
By heaved id kahded be!--bizg?--quig! gall theb all."




The old man's hinted thought was true.  Upon mustering the company,
The old bahds hidded thoughed wahd drewe.  Uboed mudgering the cobbee,

the Parsee was not there.
the Barzie wahd dod there.




"The Parsee!" cried Stubb--"he must have been caught in-"
"The Barzie!" kride Stubbe--"he budged haved beed gaud id-"




"The black vomit wrench thee!--run all of ye above,
"The blagge vobed rehd thee!--ruhd all ohd ye above,

alow, cabin, forecastle--find him--not gone--not gone!"
allow, gabbed, forgeald--fied hib--dod goed--dod goed!"




But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee
Bud quiggley they redered doed hib with the tidges thad the Barzie

was nowhere to be found.
wahd dower doed be foud.




"Aye, sir," said Stubb--"caught among the tangles of your line--
"Aye, sir," said Stubbe--"gaud abogh the dageled ohd your lied--

I thought I saw him dragging under."
I thoughed I saw hib dragging udder."




"My line! my line?  Gone?--gone?  What means that little word?--
"Bied lied! bied lied?  Goed?--goed?  Whad beedes thad lidtle word?--

What death-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were
Whad deethed-dehled rigs id id, thad old Ahab jhages aid if he were

the belfry.  The harpoon, too!--toss over the litter there,--
the belfry.  The harbood, doo!--doege over the lidder there,--

d'ye see it?--the forged iron, men, the white whale's--no, no, no,--
deed see id?--the forged eighed, behed, the wighed whaleds--doe, doed, toed,--

blistered fool; this hand did dart it!--'tis in the fish!--Aloft there!
blidgered fool; this hadd did dard id!--'died id the fish!--Alloved there!

Keep him nailed-Quick!--all hands to the rigging of the boats--
Keebe hib dailed-Quig!--all handes doed the riggie ohd the boedes--

collect the oars--harpooneers! the irons, the irons!--hoist the
kallegged the ords--harbouids! the eiesd, the eiesd!--hoide the

royals higher--a pull on all the sheets!--helm there! steady,
royald's higher--a bulle ohd all the sheeds!--helle there! stedgy,

steady for your life!  I'll ten times girdle the unmeasured globe;
stedgy for your life!  I'll dehd tibes girdle the unbeased globe;

yea and dive straight through it, but I'll slay him yet!
yea ad dive straid through id, bud I'll slay hib yed!




"Great God! but for one single instant show thyself,"
"Greed God! bud for whead chigled idsted show thyself,"

cried Starbuck; "never, never wilt thou capture him, old man--
kride Starbeg; "dever, dever wild thou cabture hib, old bahd--

In Jesus' name no more of this, that's worse than devil's madness.
Id Dzieges' daibe doe boehed ohd this, thadge worse thad deviles baddes.

Two days chased; twice stove to splinters; thy very leg once
Doo daeds chazed; dwige stove doed splieders; thy vearey leg ohd

more snatched from under thee; thy evil shadow gone--all good
boehed sdadged vrob udder thee; thy eveled shadow goed--all good

angels mobbing thee with warnings:--what more wouldst thou have?--
aights bobbig thee with wardings:--whad boere woold thou haved?--

Shall we keep chasing this murderous fish till he swamps the last man?
Shall we keebe chaige this burderage fish dilled he zwabbed the lasd bahd?

Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the sea?
Shall we be dragged by hib doed the bodhab ohd the sea?

Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world?  Oh, oh,--
Shall we be tood by hib doed the inveridle world?  Oh, oh,--

Impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more!"
Ibbid ad blabsheve doed hud hib boehed!"




"Starbuck, of late I've felt strangely moved to thee; ever since
"Starbeg, oeved laid Ive feld straidley buved doed thee; ever cid

that hour we both saw--thou know'st what, in one another's eyes.
thad hour we bothed saw--thou doed whad, id whid a'dothers ige.

But in this matter of the whale, be the front of thy face
Bud id this bader ohd the whale, be the frod ohd thy face

to me as the palm of this hand--a lipless, unfeatured blank.
doed be aid the bob ohd this hadd--a libles, unfedgered blagge.

Ahab is for ever Ahab, man.  This whole act's immutably decreed.
Ahab eyed for ever Ahab, bahd.  This whole agded imbudably degreed.

'Twas rehearsed by thee and me a billion years before this
'Dwead reheard by thee ad be a billiad years before this

ocean rolled.  Fool!  I am the Fates' lieutenant; I act under orders.
o'dea rolled.  Fool!  I aigh the Feiged' ludested; I agged udder orders.

Look thou, underling! that thou obeyest mine.--Stand round men, men.
Looke thou, udderlieg! thad thou obiad bied.--Sdad roude behed, behd.

Ye see an old man cut down to the stump; leaning on a shivered lance;
Ye see ad old bahd kudd dowed doed the stubbe; leighe ohd a shivered lasd;

propped up on a lonely foot.  'Tis Ahab--his body's part;
probbed ub ohd a loelde food.  'Died Ahab--hidge boddies bard;

but Ahab's soul's a centipede, that moves upon a hundred legs.
bud Abhadge tuelds a chedebeed, thad boved oobed a hudded legge.

I feel strained, half-stranded, as ropes that tow dismasted frigates
I feel straid, half-stradded, aid roebes thad doed disbadged friged

in a gale; and I may look so.  But ere I break, yell hear me crack;
id a gale; ad I beyed looke so.  Bud ere I brege, yell hear be kragge;

and till ye hear that, know that Ahab's hawser tows his purpose yet.
ad dilled ye hear thad, doed thad Habjed hauger doeds hidge perbeaue yed.

Believe ye, men, in the things called omens?  Then laugh aloud,
Belive ye, behed, id the thigs gauled obes?  Thed laugh aloud,

and cry encore!  For ere they drown, drowning things will twice
ad gried engored!  For ere they drowed, drowing thigs will dwige

rise to the surface; then rise again, to sink for evermore.
rieds doed the surface; thed rieds agaid, doed chig for everbore.

So with Moby Dick--two days he's floated--to-morrow will be the third.
So with Bobey Dig--dued dais heeds floeded--doed-bohrow will be the third.

Aye, men, he'll rise once more,--but only to spout his last!
Aye, behed, he'll rieds ohd boehed,--bud oldey doed sboud hidge lazd!

D'ye feel brave men, brave?"
Deed feel brave behd, brave?"




"As fearless fire," cried Stubb.
"Aid fearless fire," kride Stubbe.




"And as mechanical," muttered Ahab.  Then as the men went forward,
"Ad aids megadigal," buddered Ahab.  Thed aid the behed wed forward,

he muttered on:  "The things called omens!  And yesterday I talked
he buddered ohd:  "The thigs gauled obes!  Ad yerdedge I tauged

the same to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat.  Oh! how valiantly
the chaibe doed Stabbeg there, condering bied brogaed boed.  Oh! how vellidely

I seek to drive out of others' hearts what's clinched so fast in mine!--
I giege doed dvive oud ohd others' heard whadge klieged so vasged id bied!--

The Parsee--the Parsee!--gone, gone? and he was to go before:--
The Barzie--the Barzie!--goed, goed? ad he wahd doed go before:--

but still was to be seen again ere I could perish--How's that?--
bud stilled wahd doed be geed agaed ere I cooled perridge--Houge thad?--

There's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed by the ghosts
Theired's a riddle doed bied baffle all the lawer's bagged by the goudsed

of the whole line of judges:--like a hawk's beak it pecks my brain.
od the whole lied ohd judges:--digue a hauged beeg id pegge bied braied.

I'll, I'll solve it, though!"
I'll, I'll solve id, though!"




When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.
Wehd dudge deceded, the whale wahd stild id chide doed leeward.




So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed
So ohd boehed the sail wahd chorded, ad everidhed pasged

nearly as on the previous night; only, the sound of hammers,
dearley aid ohd the previas died; oldie, the soude ohd habser's,

and the hum of the grindstone was heard till nearly daylight,
ad the hub ohd the griedstoed wahd heard dilled dearley daylide,

as the men toiled by lanterns in the complete and careful
aid the behed doiled by landered's id the combled ad kaervell

rigging of the spare boats and sharpening their fresh weapons
rigging ohd the sbeared boedes ad sharbiz their fresh weebes

for the morrow.  Meantime, of the broken keel of Ahab's wrecked
for the baro.  Beedeabe, ohd the brogea'd gield od Habjed wregged

craft the carpenter made him another leg; while still as on
graved the carboder bayed hib autheard leg; while stilled aid ohd

the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his scuttle;
the died before, slouged Ahab stood figged withed hidge scuddle;

his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its dial;
hidge hid, heleotrobe glads ad-digitabled goed bagward ohd idd dial;

sat due eastward for the earliest sun.
jad due easdward for the earliaged chud.










CHAPTER 135
CHABTER 135




The Chase - Third Day
The Chase - Third Day







The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once
The boerding ohd the third day daude fair ad fresh, ad ohd

more the solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved
boehed the cholidary died-bahd ed the fore-based-head wahd relieved

by crowds of the daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast
by krouds ohd the daylide looke-ouds, who dodded every bazd

and almost every spar.
ad albosd every spaar.




"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.
"Deed see hib?" kride Ahab; bud the whale wahd dod yed id chide.




"In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.
"Id hidge invalled weigg, though; bud follow thad weigg, thadge all.

Helm there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.
Helle there; stedgy, aids thou goede, ad hadged beed goege.

What a lovely day again! were it a new-made world, and made for
Whad a lovely day agaed! were id a dewe-bayed world, ad bayed for

a summer-house to the angels, and this morning the first of its
a subre-house doed the aights, ad this bording the furged ove idd

throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that world.
throedg obed doed theb, a fairer day cooled dod daude uebough thad world.

Here's food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks;
Heards food for thoughed, had Ahab diebe doed thig; bud Ahab dever thigs;

he only feels, feels, feels; that's tingling enough for mortal
he oldie feelds, feelds, feelds; thadge dighdes ehaud for bordel

man! to think's audacity.  God only has that right and privilege.
bahd! doed thigs uddized.  God oldie had thad wried ad priveled.

Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness and a calmness; and our
Thiggi eyed, or oughed doed be, a kulda's ad a colbed; ad our

poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too much for that.
boore heard throb, ad our boore braids beed dued bud for thad.

And yet, I've sometimes thought my brain was very calm--
Ad yed, Ive subdieds thoughed bied braied wahd vearey gaab--

frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which
frosed gaab, this old sculd kragge so, digue a glass id which

the contents turned to ice, and shiver it.  And still this hair
the coudeded durde doed ice, ad shiver id.  Ad stilled this hair

is growing now; this moment growing, and heat must breed it;
eighed groig doed; this boebed groig, ad heed budged breed id;

but no, it's like that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere,
bud doed, idge digue thad sord ohd kahabed grass thad will grow aywyered,

between the earthy clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava.
bedweed the earthey klefdes oughe Greedeled ice or id Vijuvias lava.

How the wild winds blow it; they whip it about me as the torn
How the wild wids blow id; they whib id aboud be aids the tored

shreds of split sails lash the tossed ship they cling to.
shredged ohd splid chailes lash the dodged gib they glig doed.

A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this through prison corridors
A vield wide thad had doe doud blowed ere this through prized cordeds

and cells, and wards of hospitals, and ventilated them, and now comes
ad gell's, ad wards ohd hosbutled's, ad vedeladed theb, ad doed coubs

blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.  Out upon it!--it's tainted.
blowig hither aid inazed aid fleeges.  Oud ueboed id!--idge taided.

Were I the wind, I'd blow no more on such a wicked, miserable world.
Were I the wide, I'd blow doe boehed ohd such a wigged, miserable world.

I'd crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink there.  And yet,
I'd krawel subhuer doed a gave, ad slig there.  Ad yed,

'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever conquered it?
'died a bobel ad heroid thig, the wide! who ever kogherd id?

In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow.  Run tilting
Id every fied id had the lazd ad bideraged blow.  Ruhd tilding

at it, and you but run through it.  Ha! a coward wind that strikes
ed id, ad you bud ruhd through id.  Ha! a cowed wiede thad striges

stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.
starge daiged behed, bud will dod sdad doed redieve a chigled blow.

Even Ahab is a braver thing--a nobler thing than that.
Eved Ahab eighed a braver thig--a boeber thig thad thad.

Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that most
Would toed the wide bud had a body; bud all the thigs thad boedge

exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless,
exagerade ad outred bordel bahd, all theeds thigs are boddles,

but only bodiless as objects, not as agents.  There's a
bud oldie boddles aid abdegged, dod aid aded.  Theired's a

most special, a most cunning, oh, a most malicious difference!
boedge spegial, a bodge culding, oh, a bodge baligiage diverans!

And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that there's something
Ad yed, I say agaed, ad swear id doed, thad theired's sothedig

all glorious and gracious in the wind.  These warm Trade Winds,
all glorious ad gracious id the wide.  Theeds warb Trade Wids,

at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in strong
ed leedged, thad id the cleared heaves blow straid ohd, id strogg

and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark,
ad steadvad, vigerad bildes; ad vied dod vrob their barge,

however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack,
howver the baser kurded ohd the sea beyed durd ad tag,

and mightiest Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about,
ad beides Misigibes ohd the laad swidged ad swerve abough,

uncertain where to go at last.  And by the eternal Poles!
underdaied where doed go ed lazd.  Ad by the ederad Poles!

these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on;
theeds chaibe Trades thad so dergedly blow bied good gib ohd;

these Trades, or something like them--something so unchangeable,
theeds Traids, or sothedig digue theb--sothedig so uddiedabled,

and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along!  To it!  Aloft there!
ad full aid strogg, blow bied keeld soul allog!  Doed id!  Alloved there!

What d'ye see?"
Whad deed see?"




"Nothing, sir."
"Tottig, sir."




"Nothing! and noon at hand!  The doubloon goes a-begging! See
"Tothig! ad dooed ed hadd!  The dooblood goeds a-beggie! See

the sun!  Aye, aye, it must be so.  I've over-sailed him.
the chud!  Aye, aye, id budged be so.  Ive over-sailed hib.

How, got the start?  Aye, he's chasing me now; not I, him--
How, god the stard?  Aye, heeds chaige beege toed; dod I, hib--

that's bad; I might have known it, too.  Fool! the lines--
thadge bad; I bied haved doed id, dued.  Fool! the lieds--

the harpoons he's towing.  Aye, aye, I have run him by last night.
the harboods heeds toeig.  Aye, aye, I haved ruhd hib by lazd died.

About! about!  Come down, all of ye, but the regular look outs!
Aboud! abowed!  Coeb dowed, all ohd ye, bud the regular looke ouds!

Man the braces!"
Bahd the braiges!"




Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the
Steege aid she had doed, the wide had beed subrud ohd the

Pequod's quarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction,
Pegwedge quarder, so thad towe beed boided id the revers dereguted,

the braced ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned
the braiged gib sailed hard oobed the brieds aid she redered

the cream in her own white wake.
the greebe id her owed wighed weigg.




"Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw," murmured Starbuck
"Aghaid the wide he towe steereds for the obed jaw," merbured Starbeg

to himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail.
doed hibsulve, aid he goiled the doe-hauled beid-brace oobed the rail.

"God keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from
"God keebe us, bud already bied boedes feel dab withed beigh, ad vrob

the inside wet my flesh.  I misdoubt me that I disobey my God
the inside wedge bied flesh.  I biedowed be thad I disobey bied God

in obeying him!"
id obieg hib!"




"Stand by to sway me up!" cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
"Sdad by doed sway be ub!" kride Ahab, advanges doed the hebbed baged.

"We should meet him soon."
"We should beed hib tued."




"Aye, aye, sir," and straightway Starbuck did Ahab's bidding,
"Aye, aye, sir," ad straighway Starbeg did Habjed bidding,

and once more Ahab swung on high.
ad ohde boehed Ahab swig ohd high.




A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages.
A whole hour doed pasged; gold-beede oud doed aidges.

Time itself now held long breaths with keen suspense.
Diebe idgelve toed held laugh breathed with queed chusbeage.

But at last, some three points off the weather bow, Ahab descried
Bud ed lasd, sub thried boided off the weather bow, Ahab degedreed

the spout again, and instantly from the three mast-heads
the sboud agaid, ad indsteldy vrob the thried bazd-hedged

three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it.
thried shrieges wed ub aid if the dogged ohd fire had voiged id.




"Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick!
"Forehead doed forehead I beed thee, this third diebe, Bobey Dig!

On deck there!--brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye.
Ohd degge there!--brace jharber ub; growed her id the wides eye.

He's too far off to lower yet, Mr. Starbuck.  The sails shake!
Heeds dued far off doed lower yed, Behd. Starbeg.  The chailes jhage!

Stand over that helmsman with a top-maul! So, so; he travels fast,
Sdad over thad helbsbears with a dob-bauled! So, so; he dravels vasged,

and I must down.  But let me have one more good round look aloft
ad I budged dowed.  Bud led be haved whid boehed good roude looke alloved

here at the sea; there's time for that.  An old, old sight, and yet
here ed the sea; theireds diebe for thad.  Ad old, old chide, ad yed

somehow so young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it,
subhew so yughed; aye, ad dod jaide a wigg chids I furged saw id,

a boy, from the sand-hills of Nantucket!  The same--the same!--
a boy, vrob the jad-hilds ohd Dadicked!  The chaibe--the chaibe!--

the same to Noah as to me.  There's a soft shower to leeward.
the saibe doed Doed aid doed be.  Theireds a soved shower doed leeward.

Such lovely leewardings!  They must lead somewhere--
Such lovely leeweadgs!  They budged lead subhuer--

to something else than common land, more palmy than the palms.
doed sothedig else thad kahbes lad, boehed bobey thad the bolled.

Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then;
Leeward! the wighed whale goeds thad way; looke doed widward, thed;

the better if the bitterer quarter.  But good bye, good bye,
the beder if the biderer quarder.  Bud good bye, good bye,

old mast-head! What's this?--green? aye, tiny mosses in these
old basde-head! Whad's this?--greed? aye, died modges id theeds

warped cracks.  No such green weather stains on Ahab's head!
warbed kragge.  Doed such greed weather staids ohd Habbedge head!

There's the difference now between man's old age and matter's.
Theired's the diverands toed bedweed bazd old age ad badders.

But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in our hulls,
Bud aye, old bazd, we bothed grow old dogether; soude id our hulds,

though are we not, my ship?  Aye, minus a leg, that's all.
though are we dod, bied gib?  Aye, beides a leg, thadge all.

By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way.
By heaved this dead wood had the beder ohd bied live flesh every way.

I can't compare with it; and I've known some ships made of dead trees
I gad cobpered with id; ad Ive toed sub ghibs bayed oeved dead dreedge

outlast the lives of men made of the most vital stuff of vital fathers.
outladged the lives ohd behed bayed ohd the boedge videl stub ohd videl vathers.

What's that he said? he should still go before me, my pilot;
Whad's thad he said? he should stilled go before be, bied pilled;

and yet to be seen again?  But where?  Will I have eyes at
ad yed doed be geed agaid?  Bud where?  Will I haved ige ed

the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs?
the bodhab ohd the sea, subbozig I deged thoeds edled steares?

and all night I've been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to.
ad all died Ive beed chailg vrob hib, wharvear he did chig doed.

Aye, aye, like many more thou told'st direful truth as
Aye, aye, digue baid boehed thou tolde dievele dreughed aides

touching thyself, O Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short.
tudgieg thyself, O Bargee; bud, Ahab, there thy jod fell jhord.

Good bye, mast-head--keep a good eye upon the whale, the while I'm gone.
Good bye, bazd-head--keebe a good eye uboed the whale, the while Ibe goed.

We'll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies
We'll tog doed-baro, deye, doed-died, wehd the wighed whale lieds

down there, tied by head and tail."
dowed there, deid by head ad daile."




He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered
He gave the word; ad stilled gaiging roude hib, wahd steadley lowered

through the cloven blue air to the deck.
through the cloved blue air doed the degge.




In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his
Id due diebe the boedes were lowered; bud aids staded id hidge

shallop's stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent,
jhallebs stird, Ahab judged hoved ueboed the poid ohd the deged,

he waved to the mate,--who held one of the tackle--ropes on deck--
he waived doed the bayed,--who held whead ohd the taggel--roebes ohd degge--

and bade him pause.
ad bade hib bouge.




"Starbuck!"
"Starbeg!"




"Sir?"
"Sir?"




"For the third time my soul's ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck."
"For the third diebe bied tuelds gib stards oobed this voyed, Starbeg."




"Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so."
"Aye, sir, thou wild haved id so."




"Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards
"Sub ghibs sail vrob their pordes, ad ever afderwords

are missing, Starbuck!"
are bizg, Starbeg!"




"Truth, sir:  saddest truth."
"Druthed, sir:  sadded druthed."




"Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full
"Sub behd die ed ebb died; sub edge low wader; sub ed the full

of the flood;--and I feel now like a billow that's all one
ove the flood;--ad I feel toed ligue a billow thadge all whid

crested comb, Starbuck.  I am old;--shake hands with me, man."
credzed kob, Starbeg.  I aigh old;--jhage hands with be, bahd."




Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck's tears the glue.
Their handes bed; their ige fabed; Starbugs deares the glue.




"Oh, my captain, my captain!--noble heart--go not--go not!--see, it's a
"Oh, bied cabted, bied cabted!--boble heard--go dod--go dod!--see, idge a

brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!"
brave bahd thad weebeds; how greed the aguid ohd the persueged thed!"




"Lower away!"-cried Ahab, tossing the mate's arm from him.
"Lower away!"-kride Ahab, toggie the baides arbe vrob hib.

"Stand by for the crew!"
"Sdad by for the grewe!"




In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.
Id ad isded the boed wahd pullig roued gloeds udder the stird.




"The sharks! the sharks!" cried a voice from the low cabin-window there;
"The gharges! the gharges!" kride a voige vrob the low gabbed-widdew there;

"O master, my master, come back!"
"O bazder, bied bazder, coeb bagge!"




But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then;
Bud Ahab heard tothig; for hidge owed voige wahd high-lifded thed;

and the boat leaped on.
ad the boed leebed ohd.




Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship,
Yed the voige speig drewe; for schard had he pudged vrob the gib,

when numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters
wehd tubbers oeved gharges, seibled rigis vrob oud the darge waders

beneath the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars,
bedee the hull, miligialdy stabbed ed the blaids ohd the ords,

every time they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied
every diebe they dibbed id the wader; ad id this way accobbid

the boat with their bites.  It is a thing not uncommonly happening
the boed with their bides.  Id eighed a thig dod aughobeldy haping

to the whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks at times
doed the whale-boedes id thoeds swarbing geeds; the gharges ed tibes

apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures
abperdelly folloig thebe id the chaibe pregead way thad vulgers

hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east.
hover over the bahders ohd bardig redibend id the eaged.

But these were the first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod
Bud theeds were the furged gharges thad had beed obsurved by the Begwed

since the White Whale had been first descried; and whether it
chid the Wighed Whale had beed furged degedreed; ad whether id

was that Ahab's crew were all such tiger-yellow barbarians,
wahd thad Habjed grewe were all such deiger-yellow barbedrias,

and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the sharks--
ad therefore their flesh boehed muggie doed the cezd's ohd the gharges--

a matter sometimes well known to affect them,--however it was,
a bader subdieds well toed doed avegt theb,--howver id wahd,

they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others.
they seebed doed follow thad whid boed withowd bollezding the others.




"Heart of wrought steel!" murmured Starbuck gazing over the side,
"Heard ove rood steeled!" merbured Starbeg gaiging over the side,

and following with his eyes the receding boat--"canst thou
ad folloig with hidge ige the regeding boed--"card thou

yet ring boldly to that sight?--lowering thy keel among
yed rig boldly doed thad chide?--loughering thy gield abogh

ravening sharks, and followed by them, open-mouthed to the chase;
raveign gharges, ad followed by theb, obed-bouthed doed the chase;

and this the critical third day?--For when three days
ad this the gridigle third day?--For wehd thried daeds

flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be sure
flow dogether id whid cuddiewad id-dead pergeoud; be sure

the first is the morning, the second the noon, and the third
the furged eyed the bording, the chegad the dooed, ad the third

the evening and the end of that thing--be that end what it may.
the evig ad the ed ove thad thig--be thad ed whad id beyed.

Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me
Oh! bied God! whad eighed this thad shood's through be, ad leeved be

so deadly calm, yet expectant,--fixed at the top of a shudder!
so deadly gaabe, yed eggepted,--figged edge the dob oughe a shudder!

Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons;
Future thigs quib before be, ade id ebbed outlieds ad skeldes;

all the past is somehow grown dim.  Mary, girl; thou fadest
all the bazd eighed subhe growed dib.  Barey, girl; thou fades

in pale glories behind me; boy!  I seem to see but thy eyes
id baile glorgey's behid be; boy!  I zeebe doed see bud thy ige

grown wondrous blue.  Strangest problems of life seem clearing;
growed wodred blue.  Stredsed probles oughe life zeebe clearing;

but clouds sweep between--Is my journey's end coming?
bud clouds sweebe bedweed--Eyed bied gerdies ed koebing?

My legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day.
Bied legge feel feiged; digue hidge who had fooded id all day.

Feel thy heart,--beats it yet?  Stir thyself, Starbuck!--
Feel thy heard,--beeds id yed?  Sdur thyself, Starbeg!--

stave it off--move, move! speak aloud!--Mast-head there!
staved id off--bove, bove! sbeeg aloud!--Bazd-head there!

See ye my boy's hand on the hill?--Crazed; aloft there!--
See ye bied boise hadd ohd the hill?--Craide; alloved there!--

keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:--mark well the whale!--
keebe thy keedas eye oobed the boedes:--barge well the whale!--

Ho! again!--drive off that hawk! see! he pecks--he tears the vane"--
Ho! agaid!--dvive off thad haug! see! he pegge--he deares the veyed"--

pointing to the red flag flying at the main-truck--"Ha, he soars
poiding doed the red flag flieg ed the beighed-drug--"Ha, he sooreds

away with it!--Where's the old man now? see'st thou that sight,
away with id!--Wears the old bahd toed? geedge thou thad chide,

oh Ahab!--shudder, shudder!"
oh Ahab!--shudder, shudder!"




The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads--
The boedes had dod goed veary far, wehd by a chidel vrob the bazd-hedged--

a downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded;
a dowdward boided arbe, Ahab d'ead thad the whale had souded;

but intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on his way
bud iddesting doed be deared hib ed the degded rigis, he held ohd hidge way

a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining
a lidtle sideways vrob the vegelle; the beabard grewe beideighed

the profoundest silence, as the head-bent waves hammered and hammered
the provouded cyled, aids the head-bed waives halmered ad halmered

against the opposing bow.
aghaid the obozig bow.




"Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost
"Dvive, dvive id your dailes, oh ye waives! doed their utderbosd

heads drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid;
hedged dvive theb id! ye bud strige a thig withowd a lid;

and no coffin and no hearse can be mine:--and hemp only can
ad doed coved ad doe hearse gad be bied:--ad hebbe oldie gad

kill me!  Ha! ha!"
gild be!  Ha! ha!"




Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles;
Suddley the waders auroud thebe slowly swelled id broad chirgels;

then quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged
thed quiggley abvied, aid if sideways slidg vrob a subburd

berg of ice, swiftly rising to the surface.  A low rumbling sound
berg oughe ice, swidved rigiz doed the surface.  A low rubbeld soude

was heard; a subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths;
wahd heard; a cubtraides hub; ad thed all held their breathed;

as bedraggled with trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances,
aid bedraggled with traigle roebeds, ad harboods, ad lazds,

a vast form shot lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea.
a vazged vorbe jod leagthwide, bud ablighe vrob the sea.

Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist, it hovered for a moment
Shrouded id a thied drubig vied ohd bid, id hoved for a boebed

in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping back into the deep.
id the raidbood air; ad thed fell swabbing bagge id the deebe.

Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed for an instant
Crusged thirdy feed ubwards, the waders flasged for ad idsted

like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower of flakes,
digue heebed od foudes, thed brogeley chagg id a shower ove flages,

leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble
levig the chirgling surface creebed digue dewe bilg roude the barbel

trunk of the whale.
drug ohd the whale.




"Give way!" cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to
"Gived way!" kride Ahab doed the orzbead, ad the boedes darded forward doed

the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corroded in him,
the adteg; bud badded by yejderdes fresh eiesd thad corroded id hib,

Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell
Bobey Dig seebed cobbidly pazzed by all the aight's thad fell

from heaven.  The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad
vrob heaved.  The wide deared ohd welded tedes overbreadge hidge broad

white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted together;
wighed forehead, bedee the trazdbered squid, looked didded dogether;

as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; and once more
aid head ohd, he gabe cherding hidge daile abogh the boedes; ad ohd boehed

flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from the two mates'
flaid theb abard; spilling oud the eiesd ad lazds vrob the dued baides'

boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows,
boedes, ad dagie id whid side oeved the upper bard ohd their boeds,

but leaving Ahab's almost without a scar.
bud levig Habjed albosd withowd a chard.




While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks;
While Dague ad Queed were stopbing the straid plagged;

and as the whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed
ad aid the whale swibbing oud vrob theb, durde, ad showed

one entire flank as he shot by them again; at that moment
whid endeid flagg aid he jod by theb agaed; ed thad boebed

a quick cry went up.  Lashed round and round to the fish's back;
a quig gried wed ub.  Lasged roued ad roued doed the fijes bagge;

pinioned in the turns upon turns in which, during the past night,
pideas id the durds oobed durds id which, duerging the bazd died,

the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him,
the whale had reeled the inviluges ohd the lieds aroud hib,

the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his sable raiment
the half tored body ohd the Barzie wahd geed; hidge sable raibed

frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old Ahab.
frayed doed shredge; hidge disdedd ige durde full oobed old Ahab.




The harpoon dropped from his hand.
The harbood drobbed vrob hidge hadd.




"Befooled, befooled!"--drawing in a long lean breath--"Aye, Parsee!  I see
"Bevooled, bevooled!"--drawig id a laugh leed breathe--"Aye, Barzie!  I see

thee again.--Aye, and thou goest before; and this, this then is the hearse
thee agaid.--Aye, ad thou goede before; ad this, this thed eighed the hearse

that thou didst promise.  But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word.
thad thou didged probed.  Bud I hold thee doed the lazd lehder ohd thy word.

Where is the second hearse?  Away, mates, to the ship! those boats
Where eighed the chegad hearse?  Away, baides, doed the gib! thoeds boedes

are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and return to me;
are useless doed; rebeared theb if ye gad id diebe, ad reedered doed be;

if not, Ahab is enough to die--Down, men! the first thing that but
if dod, Ahab eighed ehaud doed die--Dowed, behed! the furged thig thad bud

offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I harpoon.
overs doed jubb vrob this boed I sdad id, thad thig I harbood.

Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me.--
Ye are dod other behed, bud bied arbes ad bied legge; ad so obey be.--

Where's the whale? gone down again?"
Wears the whale? goed dowed agaid?"




But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping
Bud he looked dued deigh the boed; for aid if bed oobed esgabing

with the corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last
with the corbes he bore, ad aid if the baudigular plaige ohd the lazd

encounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick
engoure had beed bud a stage id hidge leeward voyed, Bobey Dig

was now again steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed
wahd toed agaed steadley swibbing forward; ad had albosd pasged

the ship,--which thus far had been sailing in the contrary direction
the gib,--which thus far had beed chailg id the coudrey dereguted

to him, though for the present her headway had been stopped.
doed hib, though for the presed her headway had beed stobbed.

He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent
He seebed swibbing with hidge udboad villagedy, ad toed oldie idted

upon pursuing his own straight path in the sea.
oobed burgewig hidge owed straid bathed id the sea.




"Oh!  Ahab," cried Starbuck, "not too late is it, even now,
"Oh!  Ahab," kride Starbug, "dod dued laid eighed id, eved towe,

the third day, to desist.  See!  Moby Dick seeks thee not.
the third day, doed dizged.  See!  Bobey Dig seeges thee dod.

It is thou, thou, that madly seekest him!"
Id eighed thou, thou, thad badley cieged hib!"




Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was
Cedig sail doed the rigis wide, the loelde boed wahd

swiftly impelled to leeward, by both oars and canvas.
zwidved ibpeld doed leeward, by bothed ords ad calvas.

And at last when Ahab was sliding by the vessel, so near
Ad ed lazd wehd Ahab wahd slidg by the vegelle, so deere

as plainly to distinguish Starbuck's face as he leaned
aid plaied doed disdig Starbugs face aid he leed

over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about,
over the rail, he hailed hib doed durd the vegell aboud,

and follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval.
ad follow hib, dod dued swidved, ed a judicious indervell.

Glancing upwards he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo,
Glangiz ubwards he saw Dazgeage, Queed, ad Dagued,

eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen
eagerly boughid doed the thried bazd-hedged; while the orzbead

were rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been
were rogging id the dued staved boedes which had bud judged beed

hoisted to the side, and were busily at work in repairing them.
hoisded doed the side, ad were budzley ed werg id rebearing theb.

One after the other, through the port-holes, as he sped,
Whid afder the other, through the pord-holeds, aid he sbed,

he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask,
he also gaud flieg glibseds ohd Stubbe ad Flasg,

busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances.
budzig thebsbeds ohd degge abogh buddled ohd dewe ireds ad lazds.

As he saw all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats;
Aids he saw all this; aid he heard the habser's id the brogaed boedes;

far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart.
far other habser's seebed drivig a daile id hidge heard.

But he rallied.  And now marking that the vane or flag
Bud he rallied.  Ad doed barging thad the veyed or flag

was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego,
wahd goed vrob the beighed-bazd-head, he shouded doed Dagego,

who had just gained that perch, to descend again for another flag,
who had judged gayed thad perd, doed deged agaid for authougher flag,

and a hammer and nails, and so nail it to the mast.
ad a haber ad dailes, ad so daile id doed the based.




Whether fagged by the three days' running chase, and the
Whether fagged by the thried dais' ruhding chase, ad the

resistance to his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore;
resida's doed hidge swibbing id the todded habber he bore;

or whether it was some latent deceitfulness and malice in him:
or whether id wahd sub laded dedegeld ad ballige id hib:

whichever was true, the White Whale's way now began to abate,
whidver wahd drewe, the Wighed Whaleds way toed begged doed abbed,

as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more;
aid id seebed, vrob the boed so rebbidly dearing hib ohd boehed;

though indeed the whale's last start had not been so long a one
though iddeed the whaleds lazd stard had dod beed so laugh a whid

as before.  And still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying
aid before.  Ad stilled aids Ahab glided over the waives the udbide

sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to the boat;
jharges accobid hib; ad so perdidaged stucke doed the boed;

and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades
ad so cuddielde bid ed the plieg ords, thad the blaids

became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in the sea,
begebe jagged ad crudged, ad leaved schalle splieders id the sea,

at almost every dip.
ed albosd every dib.




"Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.
"Heed theb dod! thoeds teethed bud gived dewe rollaged doed your ords.

Pull on! 'tis the better rest, the sharks' jaw than the yielding water."
Bulle ohd! 'died the beder resged, the jharges' jaw thad the yeelde wader."




"But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!"
"Bud ed every bied, sir, the thid blaids grow schawler ad swaller!"




"They will last long enough! pull on!--But who can tell"--
"They will lazd laugh ehaud! bulle ohd!--Bud who gad dehled"--

he muttered--"whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale
he buddered--"whether theeds gharges quib doed feedged ohd the whale

or on Ahab?--But pull on!  Aye, all alive, now--we near him.
or ohd Ahab?--Bud bulle ohd!  Aye, all alvieve, doed--we deere hib.

The helm! take the helm! let me pass,"--and so saying two of the
The helle! daig the helle! led be baz,"--ad so ceige doo ohd the

oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.
orzbead helbed hib forward doed the boese ohd the stilled flieg boed.




At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging
Ed legted aid the graved wahd cadge doed whid side, ad raad ragied

along with the White Whale's flank, he seemed strangely
allog with the Wighed Whaled's flagg, he seebed straidley

oblivious of its advance--as the whale sometimes will--and Ahab
oblivias ohd idd advads--aid the whale subdieds will--ad Ahab

was fairly within the smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off
wahd fairly withed the swogee boulde bid, which, throued off

from the whale's spout, curled round his great Monadnock hump;
vrob the whalds sboud, kirled roude hidge greed Boldad hubb;

he was even thus close to him; when, with body arched back,
he wahd eved thus gloeds doed hib; wehd, with body ardged bagge,

and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the poise, he darted
ad bothed arbes leagthwide high-lifded doed the boyed, he darded

his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the hated whale.
hidge fierce eight, ad hidge far fiercer gurz id the haided whale.

As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if sucked into
Aid bothed steeled ad gurz chagg doed the socged, ades if sugged id

a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled
a borredge, Bobey Dig sideways writhed; sbadzbodig rolled

his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole
hidge deigh flagg aghaid the bow, ad, withowd stavig a hole

in it, so suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been
id id, so suddley cadd the boed over, thad had id dod beed

for the elevated part of the gunwale to which he then clung,
for the elevaded bard od the guaweld doed which he thed klug,

Ahab would once more have been tossed into the sea.
Ahab would ohd boehed haved beed doedged id the sea.

As it was, three of the oarsmen--who foreknew not the precise
Aid id wahd, thried ove the orzbead--who fordgead dod the predies

instant of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for its effects--
isded ohd the dard, ad were therefore unbrebered for idd evect's--

these were flung out; but so fell, that, in an instant two
theeds were flug oud; bud so fell, thad, id ad idsted dued

of them clutched the gunwale again, and rising to its level on
ohd theb cludged the gueweld agaid, ad rigis doed idd levele ohd

a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard again; the third
a cobig waive, hurled thebsbeds bodily inboard agaid; the third

man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and swimming.
bahd hellblesgly drobing audered, bud stilled avlode ad swibbing.




Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
Albosd cibildested, with a bidey voligiad ohd ungradidged,

instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the
ildstederaged swidved, the Wighed Whale darded through the

weltering sea.  But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take
welderig sea.  Bud wehd Ahab kride oud doed the steerbead doed daig

new turns with the line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew
dued durds with the lied, ad hold id so; ad comaded the grewe

to turn round on their seats, and tow the boat up to the mark;
doed durd roude ohd their cheeds, ad doed the boed ub doed the barge;

the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug,
the boebed the dreederage lied feld thad double straid ad dug,

it snapped in the empty air!
id stabbed id the ebbed air!




"What breaks in me?  Some sinew cracks!--'tis whole again; oars! oars!
"Whad breeged id beigh?  Sub ziewe kragge!--'died whole agaid; ords! ords!

Burst in upon him!"
Burged id uboed hib!"




Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale
Hearing the drebeded rush ohd the sea-cragieg boed, the whale

wheeled round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in
wheeled roude doed presed hidge blagge forehead ed bay; bud id

that evolution, catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship;
thad eviluage, cadging cheid oughe the dearing blagge hull ohd the gib;

seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions;
seibeldi keege id id the source oeved all hidge perseguates;

bethinking it--it may be--a larger and nobler foe; of a sudden,
bethig id--id beyed be--a larger ad boeber foe; ohd a chudde,

he bore down upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery
he bore dowed oobed idd advange prowe, spighed hidge jawes abid fiery

showers of foam.
showers ove vobe.




Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead.  "I grow blind;
Ahab stagged; hidge had swoed hidge forehead.  "I grow blied;

hands! stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way.
handes! stredge oud before be thad I beyed yed groebe bied way.

Is't night?"
Eighed died?"




"The whale!  The ship!" cried the cringing oarsmen.
"The whale!  The gib!" kride the kriege orzbead.




"Oars! oars!  Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea that ere
"Ores! ords!  Sloebe dowewards doed thy debthed, O sea thad ere

it be for ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time
id be for ever dued laid, Ahab beyed slide this lasd, lazd diebe

upon his mark!  I see:  the ship! the ship!  Dash on, my men!
uboed hidge barge!  I see:  the gib! the gib!  Dash ohd, bied behed!

Will ye not save my ship?"
Will ye dod save bied gib?"




But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through
Bud aid the orzbead violedly forged their boed through

the sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends
the sledge-habring geeds, the before whale-scidde bow-edde

of two planks burst through, and in an instant almost,
ohd dued plagged burged through, ad id ad isded albosd,

the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves;
the teberably disabled boed lay dearley levele with the waives;

its half-wading, splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap
idd half-waidge, splagieg grewe, dryig hard doed stob the gab

and bale out the pouring water.
ad bale oud the bourig wader.




Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego's mast-head
Beedeabe, for thad whid beholding idsted, Tasgboges bazd-head

hammer remained suspended in his hand; and the red flag,
haber rebaid subseded id hidge hadd; ad the red flag,

half-wrapping him as with a plaid, then streamed itself
half-rabbing hib aid with a plaid, thed streed idgelve

straight out from him, as his own forward-flowing heart;
straid oud vrob hib, aid hidge owed forward-flowig heard;

while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the bowsprit beneath,
while Starbeg ad Stubbe, stade oobed the boosbrid bedee,

caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soon as he.
gaud chied oeved the dowed-koebing bolder judged aids tued aids he.




"The whale, the whale!  Up helm, up helm!  Oh, all ye sweet powers
"The whale, the whale!  Ub helb, ub helle!  Oh, all ye swede powers

of air, now hug me close!  Let not Starbuck die, if die he must,
oeved air, towe hug be gloeds!  Led dod Starbeg die, if die he budged,

in a woman's fainting fit.  Up helm, I say--ye fools, the jaw! the jaw!
id a wobeds feighted vid.  Ub helle, I say--ye fools, the jaw! the jaw!

Is this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long fidelities?
Eighed this the ed ohd all bied bursding prayers? all bied life-laugh fidelidge?

Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work.  Steady! helmsman, steady.  Nay, nay!
Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy werge.  Stedgy! helbsbeard, stedgy.  Deye, dey!

Up helm again!  He turns to meet us!  Oh, his unappeasable brow
Ub helle agaid!  He durds doed beed us!  Oh, hidge unabeabled brow

drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart.
dvived ohd toweded whid, whoeds dued del's hib he kahad debard.

My God, stand by me now!"
Bied God, sdad by be doed!"




"Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will
"Sdad dod by be, bud sdad udder beg, whoeder you are thad will

now help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here.  I grin at thee,
doed helbe Stubbe; for Stubbe, dued, stigge here.  I gried ed thee,

thou grinning whale!  Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake,
thou griede whale!  Who ever helbed Stubbe, or kebbed Stubbe awgag,

but Stubb's own unwinking eye?  And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon
bud Stubbs oud udwigging eye?  Ad towe boore Stubbe goeds doed bed oobed

a mattrass that is all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood!
a badradge thad eighed all dued soved; would id were studged with brushwood!

I grin at thee, thou grinning whale!  Look ye, sun, moon, and stars!
I gried ed thee, thou griede whale!  Looke ye, chud, booed, ad starges!

I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost.
I gall ye ashazed oughe aid good a fellow aid ever spouded ub hidge goedge.

For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand
For all thad, I would yed rig glazges with ye, would ye bud hadd

the cup!  Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there'll be
the gub!  Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou griede whale, bud there'll be

plenty of gulping soon!  Why fly ye not, O Ahab!  For me, off shoes
plead ohd gulbig tued!  Why fly ye dod, O Ahab!  For be, off jhoeds

and jacket to it; let Stubb die in his drawers!  A most mouldy
ad jagged doed id; led Stubbe die id hidge droerges!  A bodge bouldie

and over salted death, though;--cherries! cherries! cherries!
ad over salded deethed, though;--jerries! jerries! jerries!

Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we die!"
Oh, Flasge, for whid red cherry ere we die!"




"Cherries?  I only wish that we were where they grow.
"Gerries?  I oldie wish thad we were where they grow.

Oh, Stubb, I hope my poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this;
Oh, Stubbe, I hoebe bied boore bothers draude bied bard-beyed ere this;

if not, few coppers will now come to her, for the voyage is up."
if dod, few cobbers will doed coub doed her, for the voyed eyed ub."




From the ship's bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive;
Vrob the ghibs boeds, dearley all the ciebed doed hugge idagged;

hammers, bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained
hambers, bidge od plagge, lazds, ad harboods, bedagled redaid

in their hands, just as they had darted from their various employments;
id their hands, judged aids they had darded vrob their variage ebloybard;

all their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which from side
all their ed-dadged ige idted oobed the whale, which vrob side

to side strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad
doed side straidley vibrading hidge bredededated head, ced a broad

band of overspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed.
bad ohd overbreaged cebigergel voebe before hib aid he rusged.

Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect,
Redributed, swidged vedges, ederad ballige were id hidge whole azbecked,

and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his
ad spied ohd all thad bordel bahd cooled do, the solid wighed budred ohd hidge

forehead smote the ship's starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled.
forehead swoed the ghibs starboad bow, dilled behed ad tibbes reeled.

Some fell flat upon their faces.  Like dislodged trucks,
Sub fell flad uboed their vaiges.  Digue dislodged drugs,

the heads of the harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks.
the hedged oeved the harbouides alloved schueke ohd their bull-digue degged.

Through the breach, they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents
Through the breach, they heard the waders boure, aid boude dorded

down a flume.
dowed a fluebe.




"The ship!  The hearse!--the second hearse!" cried Ahab from the boat;
"The gib!  The hearse!--the chegad hearse!" kride Ahab vrob the boed;

"its wood could only be American!"
"idd wood cooled oldie be Abreigard!"




Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its keel;
Divig bedee the cedting gib, the whale raad quiverig allog idd gield;

but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far off
bud durding udder wader, zwidved jod doed the surface agaid, far off

the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab's boat, where, for a time,
the other bow, bud withed a few yards ohd Habjed boed, where, for a diebe,

he lay quiescent.
he lay queige.




"I turn my body from the sun.  What ho, Tashtego!  Let me
"I durd bied body vrob the chud.  Whad ho, Dasgedog!  Led be

hear thy hammer.  Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine;
hear thy haber.  Oh! ye thried aurzeadered spiers ohd bied;

thou uncracked keel; and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck,
thou angradged gield; ad oldie god-bullied hull; thou ferb degge,

and haughty helm, and Pole-pointed prow,--death--glorious ship! must
ad haudie helle, ad Poeled-boided prowe,--deathe--glorious gib! budged

ye then perish, and without me?  Am I cut off from the last fond pride
ye thed perridge, ad withowd beg?  Aigh I kudd off vrob the lazd fod pride

of meanest shipwrecked captains?  Oh, lonely death on lonely life!
oeved beedes shibrigged cabtes?  Oh, loaled deidh ohd loehled life!

Oh, now I feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief.
Oh, doed I feel bied tobboad greeded lieds id bied tobboad grief.

Ho, ho! from all your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows
Ho, ho! vrob all your furthed bouds, boure ye toed id, ye bold billows

of my whole foregone life, and top this one piled comber of my death!
ohd bied whole forgood life, ad dob this whid pied kober ohd bied deethed!

Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale;
Toweded thee I roll, thou all-desdroidge bud aghogering whale;

to the last I grapple with thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee;
doed the lazd I grabel with thee; vrob helds heard I stabbe ed thee;

for hate's sake I spit my last breath at thee.  Sink all coffins
for haides chaig I spid bied lasd breathe ed thee.  Chig all coveds

and all hearses to one common pool! and since neither can be mine,
ad all herges doed whid kahbed boole! ad chied teither gad be byed,

let me then tow to pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied
led be thed doed doed pieges, while stilled chaige thee, though died

to thee, thou damned whale!  Thus, I give up the spear!"
doed thee, thou dabed whale!  Thus, I gived ub the sbeered!"




The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward;
The harbood wahd darded; the strigge whale flew forward;

with igniting velocity the line ran through the grooves;--ran foul.
with igdidg villagedy the lied rahd through the grooved;--raad foul.

Ahab stooped to clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him
Ahab stubed doed cleared id; he did cleared id; bud the flieg durd gaud hib

round the neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim,
roude the degge, ad voisley aid Durgishe buded bouldsig their vigdab,

he was shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone.
he wahd jod oud ohd the boed, ere the grewe dued he wahd goed.

Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the rope's final end flew out
Deghd isded, the heavey eye-splige id the robes fiedel ed flew oud

of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea,
ove the starge-ebbed dubbe, togged dowed ad ordsbeaun, ad spighed the sea,

disappeared in its depths.
dishabed id idd debthed.




For an instant, the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned.
For ad isded, the tradged boeded grewe stood stilled; thed durde.

"The ship?  Great God, where is the ship?"  Soon they through dim,
"The gib?  Greed God, where eighed the gib?"  Tued they through dib,

bewildering mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous
builwidger bedies saw her sidelog feighed fadah, aid id the gaseous

Fata Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; while fixed
Fada Borgada; oldie the upperbosed balds oud ohd wader; while figged

by infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches,
by invageated, or fidelidy, or fede, doed their ohd lawfide purgeds,

the pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking look-outs on
the begged harbouides stilled beidead their chiggi looke-ouds ohd

the sea.  And now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself,
the sea.  Ad toed, culderdig chirgels cheeded the loed boed idgelve,

and all its crew, and each floating oar, and every lancepole,
ad all idd grewe, ad each floeding oar, ad every lansboled,

and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex,
ad spiegs, ahabed ad inadis, all roude ad roude id whid vordegged,

carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.
kared the scholled gib ohd the Pegwed oud ove chide.




But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over
Bud aid the lasd whelbizg inderbiglidgly bourd thebsbeds over

the sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches
the chughand head ohd the Idde edge the bairbead, levig a few iddes

of the erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards
ohd the erged spaar yed vibiled, dogether with laugh streebing yards

of the flag, which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings,
ohd the flag, which galbe uddaled, with irrodical koisdigeds,

over the destroying billows they almost touched;--at that instant, a red
over the desdrois billows they albosd tudged;--ed thad idsted, a red

arm and a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act
arb ad a habre hoved bagward ublived id the obe air, id the agged

of nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar.
ohd dailig the flag fazder ad yed fazder doed the jubsidg spaar.

A sky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards
A gniedge-haug thad taudildy had followed the bayed-drug dowewards

from its natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag,
vrob idd dadeled hoebe abogh the starges, peggic ed the flag,

and incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept
ad ingoboding Dazgedog there; this bird doed jasd doed irdeched

its broad fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood;
idd broad flutterig wig bedweed the haber ad the wood;

and simultaneously feeling that etherial thrill, the submerged
ad cibildested feeling thad etherial thrille, the subburd

savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his hammer frozen there;
chavid bedeed, id hidge deidh-gazbe, kebbed hidge habre frosed there;

and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks, and his imperial
ad so the bird ohd heaved, with argideld shrieges, ad hidge ibberial

beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the flag
beeg thrudged ubwards, ad hidge whole cabteved vorbe folded id the flag

of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink
ohd Ahab, wed dowed with hidge gib, which, digue Chade, would dod chig

to hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her,
doed hell dilled she had dragged a livig bard ohd heaved allog with her,

and helmeted herself with it.
ad helbed herself with id.




Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf;
Doed schalle foules flew screebing over the yed yaughing gulf;

a sullen white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed,
a chulde wighed surf beed aghaid idd steebe chides; thed all collaged,

and the great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five
ad the greed shroud ove the sea rolled ohd aids id rolled vive

thousand years ago.
thoudes years ago.







Epilogue
Ebeloge




"AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE"
"AD I OLDIE AIGH ESGABED ALODE DOED DEHLED THEE"

Job.
Job.




The drama's done.  Why then here does any one step forth?--
The drabas doed.  Why thed here doed aid whead steb vorge?--

Because one did survive the wreck.
Begoed whid did zhervive the wreg.







It so chanced, that after the Parsee's disappearance, I was
Id so jasged, thad afder the Parges disabered, I wahd

he whom the Fates ordained to take the place of Ahab's bowsman,
he hoebe the Fedge orded doed daig the plaige ohd Habbeds boubsed,

when that bowsman assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on
wehd thad boubes ahsubed the vigaed boedge; the chaibe, who, wehd ohd

the last day the three men were tossed from out of the rocking boat,
the lazd day the thried behed were dodged vrob oud ove the rogging boed,

was dropped astern.  So, floating on the margin of the ensuing scene,
wahd drobbed audered.  So, floeding ohd the bardes ohd the ezhud geed,

and in full sight of it, when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship
ad id full chide ohd id, wehd the halveded cugtialed oeved the kug gib

reached me, I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex.
reeged beigh, I wahd thed, bud slowly, draude toweded the clozig vordegged.

When I reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool.
Wehd I reeged id, id had subsided doed a greeby boole.

Round and round, then, and ever contracting towards the button-like
Roude ad roude, thed, ad ever codtragged toweded the budte-digue

black bubble at the axis of that slowly wheeling circle,
blagge bubble ed the agges oeved thad slowly wheelig chirgel,

like another Ixion I did revolve.  Till, gaining that vital centre,
digue authougher Igged I did devolved.  Dilled, gaighed thad videl cheade,

the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason of its
the blagge bubble ubward burged; ad doed, liberaded by reeges ohd idd

cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with great force,
culding sprigg, ad, owied doed idd greed boobeary, rigis with greed force,

the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over,
the covied life-buoy jod leagthwides vrob the sea, fell over,

and floated by my side.  Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost
ad floaded by bied side.  Buoyed ub by thad coved, for albosd

one whole day and night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main.
whid whole day ad deid, I floaded ohd a soved ad durdlide beighed.

The unharming sharks, they glided by as if with padlocks on
The ahrabering gharges, they glided by aid if with badlogge ohd

their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed with sheathed beaks.
their bouthed; the cavidge sea-hawged sailed with sheathed beeged.

On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and picked me up at last.
Ohd the chegad day, a sail drew deared, dearer, ad pigged beigh ub ed lazd.

It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing search
Id wahd the deviage-gruizg Rachel, thad id her redrage search

after her missing children, only found another orphan.
afder her bizge childred, oldie foud authougher orvid.
















ETYMOLOGY
EDIOLDIED




(Supplied by a Late Consumptive Usher to a Grammar School)
(Sublide by a Laid Conjubbed Usher doed a Grabar Schooled)




The pale Usher--threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain;
The baile Usher--threadbeared id coed, heard, body, ad braied;

I see him now.  He was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars,
I see hib doed.  He wahd ever dudsig hidge old leggiads ad grabers,

with a queer handkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay
with a queed haggerieve, boggieldy ebbelized with all the gay

flags of all the known nations of the world.  He loved to dust
flags oeved all the doed aedies ohd the world.  He louged doed dudged

his old grammars; it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.
hidge old grabers; id subhe bildley rebided hib ohd hidge bordaldi.




"While you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by
"While you daig id hadd doed schooled others, ad doed teedge theb by

what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue leaving out,
whad daibe a whale-fish eighed doed be gauled id our doged levig oud,

through ignorance, the letter H, which almost alone maketh the
through eghdeled, the lehder H, which albosd aloed baghed the

signification of the word, you deliver that which is not true."
sighivatioge ove the word, you deliver thad which eighed dod drewe."

--HACKLUYT
--HAGLED




"WHALE. ... Sw. and Dan. hval. This animal is named from roundness
"WHALE. ... Deaged. ad Dad. dhad. This alibel eighed daibed vrob rouldes

or rolling; for in Dan. hvalt is arched or vaulted."
or rohlig; for id Dad. dhud eighed ardged or volded."

--WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY
--WEBSDERs DIGTUARY




"WHALE. ... It is more immediately from the Dut. and Ger.
"WHALE. ... Id eighed boehed imbided vrob the Dud. ad Duerd.

Wallen; A.S. Walw-ian, to roll, to wallow."
Walled; A.S. Walled-ied, doed roll, doed wallow."

--RICHARDSON'S DICTIONARY
--RIDDERGED's DIGTUARY




KETOS,               Greek.
GEEDOES,               Greege.

CETUS,               Latin.
GEEDES,               Lade.

WHOEL,               Anglo-Saxon.
WHOED,               Agldo-Jagsed.

HVALT,               Danish.
DOED,               Dadize.

WAL,                 Dutch.
WAL,                 Dutch.

HWAL,                Swedish.
WHOLLED,                Swedish.

WHALE,               Icelandic.
WHALE,               Ighladic.

WHALE,               English.
WHALE,               Engis.

BALEINE,             French.
BALIED,             Frede.

BALLENA,             Spanish.
BALIDA,             Spadize.

PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE,     Fegee.
PEGGE-DIED-DEEWE,     Fedgee.

PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE,     Erromangoan.
PEGGE-DIED-DIED,     Aerobiste.







EXTRACTS
EGGDRACGED

(Supplied by a Sub-Sub-Librarian)
(Sublide by a Sub-Sub-Libridear)




It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm
Id will be geed thad this beared baidsbaked burrower ad grub-worbe

of a poor devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have gone through the long
ove a boore develed ohd a Sub-Sub abiers doed haved goed through the laugh

Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random
Vadiga's ad streed-stalles ohd the hearthe, piggi ub whadever radeb

allusions to whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever,
aljused doed whaleds he cooled ayweydes fied id aid boog hudesoed,

sacred or profane.  therefore you must not, in every case at least,
chaged or proved.  therefore you budged dod, id every gaise ed leedged,

take the higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic,
daig the higgled-piggled whale staide-bedge, howver authedge,

in these extracts, for veritable gospel cetology.  Far from it.
id theeds eggdracged, for veridable gosbell chidoldie.  Far vrob id.

As touching the ancient authors generally, as well as the poets
Aid tudge the aighead authers gelerally, aids well aid the poed

here appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining,
here aberig, theeds eggdracged are solely valubaled or ederading,

as affording a glancing bird's eye view of what has been
aid avording a glangiz birds eye viewe ohd whad haad beed

promiscuously said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan,
brobiduad said, thoughed, fanded, ad zug ohd Levida,

by many nations and generations, including our own.
by baid aedies ad gereages, ingludg our owed.




So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commentator I am.
So fare thee well, boore devile ohd a Sub-Sub, whoeds cobidator I aigh.

Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this world
Thou bellaged doed thad hoebled, challow tribe which doed wied ove this world

will ever warm; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong;
will ever warb; ad for hoebe eved Baile Sherry would be dewe rosey-strogg;

but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too;
bud with hoebe whaed subdieds luves doed chid, ad feel boore-devilige, dued;

and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full
ad grow gonvivial oobed deares; ad say doed thebe bluedley, with full

eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness--
ige ad ebbed glazges, ad id dod aldighter ulblezed sadde--

Give it up, Sub-Subs! For by how much more pains ye take to please
Gived id ub, Sub-'ubs! For by how bud boehed paids ye daig doed pleege

the world, by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless!
the world, by so bud the boehed shall ye for ever go thaghtled!

Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye!
Would thad I cooled cleared oud Habpted Cord ad the Tuerdies for ye!

But gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with
Bud gulbe dowed your deares ad hige alloved doed the royal-bazd with

your hearts; for your friends who have gone before are clearing
your heard; for your friedds who haved goed before are clearing

out the seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of long
oud the cheved-stored heaves, ad beiging revudges ohd laugh

pampered Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming.
pabbered Gabriel, Mighed, ad Raphael, aghaid your koebing.

Here ye strike but splintered hearts together--there, ye shall
Here ye strige bud spliedered heard dughterge--there, ye shall

strike unsplinterable glasses!
strige undstlider glazges!




"And God created great whales."
"Ad God kreeded greed whaleds."

--GENESIS.
--GELDES.




"Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him;
"Levida baghed a bathed doed sheid afder hib;

One would think the deep to be hoary."
Whid would thig the deebe doed be hoary."

--JOB.
--JOB.




"Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah."
"Toed the Lord had prebeard a greed fish doed swallow ub Doeda."

--JONAH.
--DOED.




"There go the ships; there is that Leviathan whom thou hast made
"There go the ghibs; there eighed thad Levida' hoebe thou hadged bayed

to play therein."
doed bleyed theired."

--PSALMS.
--TOHDS.




"In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword,
"Id thad day, the Lord with hidge sore, ad greed, ad stragge sword,

shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that
shall buede Levida the peirging cerbed, eved Levida' thad

crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea."
crooged cerbed; ad he shall slay the draged thad eighed id the sea."

--ISAIAH
--IZHAID




"And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of this
"Ad whad thig soever bedized comethe withed the gaids od this

monster's mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes all
bosder's bouthe, be id beedged, boed, or stoed, dowed id goeds all

incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and perisheth in the
ightadinders thad foul greed swallow ove hidge, ad perige id the

bottomless gulf of his paunch."
bodables gulf ohd hidge poughed."

--HOLLAND'S PLUTARCH'S MORALS.
--HOLDED PLUTERED BOREL'S.




"The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are:
"The Idde Sea breedhed the boedge ad the bigged fijes thad are:

among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called Balaene, take up as much
abog which the Whaleds ad Whirlbools gauled Baled, daig ub aid bud

in length as four acres or arpens of land."
id legted aid four ageds or arbes ove laad."

--HOLLAND'S PLINY.
--HOLDED PLIED.




"Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about sunrise a
"Sgargely had we progeded dued days ohd the sea, wehd aboud chardies a

great many Whales and other monsters of the sea, appeared. Among the
greed baid Whaleds ad other boldser's ohd the sea, abeard. Abogh the

former, one was of a most monstrous size. ... This came towards us,
forber, whad wahd ove a boedge mondres chieds. ... This gabe toweded us,

open-mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea
obe-bouthed, raige the waives ohd all chides, ad beeding the sea

before him into a foam."
before hib id a vobe."

--TOOKE'S LUCIAN. "THE TRUE HISTORY."
--DOOGEs LUGEA'D. "THE DREWE HIDGERY."




"He visited this country also with a view of catching
"He vidged this coudrey also with a viewe ohd cadge

horse-whales, which had bones of very great value for their teeth,
horse-whaleds, which had boedes ohd veary greed value for their teethed,

of which he brought some to the king. ... The best whales were
oeved which he broed sub doed the kig. ... The bezged whaleds were

catched in his own country, of which some were forty-eight, some fifty
cadged id hidge owed coudrey, ohd which sub were fordie-eige, sub fivdey

yards long. He said that he was one of six who had killed sixty in two
yards laugh. He said thad he wahd whid ohd zigged who had kild gigstey id dued

days."
dayes."

--OTHER OR OCTHER'S VERBAL NARRATIVE TAKEN DOWN FROM
--OTHER OR AUGTHErS VERBEL DARADEV DAGED DOWED VROB

HIS MOUTH BY KING ALFRED, A.D. 890.
HIDGE BOUTHE BY KIG ALFRED, A.D. 890.




"And whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, that
"Ad whereas all the other thigs, whether beedged or vegell, thad

enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) mouth, are
ehder id the dreadful gulf ohd this bosterges (whaleds) bouthe, are

immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea-gudgeon retires into it
imbided lodged ad swallowed ub, the sea-gudde redies id id

in great security, and there sleeps."
id greed seguridy, ad there sleebeds."

--MONTAIGNE. - APOLOGY FOR RAIMOND SEBOND.
--BODEAD. - ABOLDIED FOR RAIBED CHEBBED.




"Let us fly, let us fly! Old Nick take me if is not Leviathan
"Led us fly, led us fly! Old Dig daig be if eyed dod Levida'

described by the noble prophet Moses in the life of patient Job."
dejgribed by the boble proved Mosed id the life ove baighed Job."

--RABELAIS.
--RABBLED.




"This whale's liver was two cartloads."
"This whaleds liver wahd dued cardlodes."

--STOWE'S ANNALS.
--STOEDgE AHLD'S.




"The great Leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boiling
"The greed Levida' thad baghed the geeds doed seethe digue boilig

pan."
bahd."

--LORD BACON'S VERSION OF THE PSALMS.
--LORD BEGGEs VIRGES OHD THE TOHDS.




"Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have received
"Dudge thad mondres bulg ohd the whale or orge we haved regieved

nothing certain. They grow exceeding fat, insomuch that an
tothig churde. They grow eggiding vad, is-hubed thad ad

incredible quantity of oil will be extracted out of one whale."
indredable quadted ohd oil will be eghdradged oud ohd whid whale."

--IBID. "HISTORY OF LIFE AND DEATH."
--IBID. "HIDGERY OHD LIFE AD DEETHED."




"The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an inward
"The suverdes thig ohd hearth eighed parbidetti for ad inwad

bruise."
brewed."

--KING HENRY.
--KIG HEAD.




"Very like a whale."
"Veary digue a whale."

--HAMLET.
--HALBED.




"Which to secure, no skill of leach's art
"Which doed ceghured, doe skille ohd leegeds ard

Mote him availle, but to returne againe
Boed hib aveled, bud doed redered agaid

To his wound's worker, that with lowly dart,
Doed hidge wouds worger, thad with lowly dard,

Dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine,
Diddieg hidge breedged, had bred hidge resdled payed,

Like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine."
Digue aid the wouded whale doed shore flieds throed' the beighed."

--THE FAERIE QUEEN.
--THE FEARY QUEED.




"Immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can in a
"Isbead aid whald's, the moed ohd whoeds vaged bodies gad id a

peaceful calm trouble the ocean til it boil."
peegevel gaab drubble the o'dhain dild id boil."

--SIR WILLIAM DAVENANT. PREFACE TO GONDIBERT.
--SIR WILLIB DAVIDER. PREVEDGE DOED GODEDER.




"What spermacetti is, men might justly doubt, since the learned
"Whad sperbedette eyed, behed bied judgely doud, chid the learde

Hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, Nescio quid
Hosbauden's id hidge werge ohd thirdy years, chethed plaidley, Dezgeo quid

sit."
chid."

--SIR T. BROWNE. OF SPERMA CETI AND THE SPERMA CETI WHALE. VIDE HIS V. E.
--SIR DEE. BROWED. OHD SPURBA GEEDY AD THE SPURBA GEEDY WHALE. VIED HIDGE VIGE. E.




"Like Spencer's Talus with his modern flail
"Digue Speagers Taled with hidge bodder flail

He threatens ruin with his ponderous tail.
He threads rued with hidge bodderage daile.

...
...

Their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears,
Their figged daveled's id hidge side he wears,

And on his back a grove of pikes appears."
Ad ohd hidge bagge a grove ove piged abiers."

--WALLER'S BATTLE OF THE SUMMER ISLANDS.
--WALLERs BADELE OHD THE SUBRE EIDED.




"By art is created that great Leviathan, called a Commonwealth or
"By ard eighed kreeded thad greed Levida', gauled a Colpowthed or

State--(in Latin, Civitas) which is but an artificial man."
Staid--(id Lade, Givida's) which eighed bud ad ardifigiad bahd."

--OPENING SENTENCE OF HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN.
--OBING CEDTED OHD HOBBES LEVIDA'.




"Silly Mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had been a
"Silly Mes swallowed id withowd jewig, aids if id had beed a

sprat in the mouth of a whale."
sprad id the bouthe ohd a whale."

--PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.
--BILGRIBs PROGRED.




"That sea beast
"Thad sea beedged

Leviathan, which God of all his works
Levida', which God ove all hidge worges

Created hugest that swim the ocean stream."
Kreeded huded thad quib the o'dha streebe."

--PARADISE LOST.
--PARADES LODGED.




"There Leviathan,
"There Levida,

Hugest of living creatures, in the deep
Huded ohd livig kreedgers, id the deebe

Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims,
Stredged digue a brobondery sleebeds or swibs,

And seems a moving land; and at his gills
Ad ceebs a bovig laad; ad ed hidge gilds

Draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea."
Drauge id, ad ed hidge breathed spouds oud a sea."

--IBID.
--IBID.




"The mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and have a sea of
"The bidy whalds which quib id a sea ohd wader, ad haved a sea ohd

oil swimming in them."
oil swibbing id theb."

--FULLLER'S PROFANE AND HOLY STATE.
--FULLERS PROVED AD HOLY STAID.




"So close behind some promontory lie
"So gloeds behid sub brobondery lie

The huge Leviathan to attend their prey,
The huge Levida doed added their breyed,

And give no chance, but swallow in the fry,
Ad gived doe jahd, bud swallow id the fry,

Which through their gaping jaws mistake the way."
Which through their gabig jawes midgek the way."

--DRYDEN'S ANNUS MIRABILIS.
--DRIDES AHDES BERABLED.




"While the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they cut
"While the whale eighed floeding ed the steard ohd the gib, they kudd

off his head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it will
off hidge head, ad doed id with a boed aid deared the shore aid id will

come; but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet water."
koeb; bud id will be agroud id dwelve or thirdee feed wader."

--THOMAS EDGE'S TEN VOYAGES TO SPITZBERGEN, IN PURCHAS.
--THOBAS EDGEs DEHD VOYAGES DOED SPIDGBERD, ID PERDES.




"In their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, and in
"Id their way they saw baid whaleds spordig id the o'dhain, ad id

wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes and vents, which
waldes fuddigh ub the wader through their pibes ad vedted, which

nature has placed on their shoulders."
dader had plaiged ohd their showber's."

--SIR T. HERBERT'S VOYAGES INTO ASIA AND AFRICA.  HARRIS COLL.
--SIR DEED. HERBED's VOYAGES ID AUDIA AD AVGRIGA.  HARRIS GOLLED.




"Here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were forced
"Here they saw such huge trubes ohd whaleds, thad they were forged

to proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they should run their
doed prozid with a greed deal ove kaudes for fear they should ruhd their

ship upon them."
gib oobed theb."

--SCHOUTEN'S SIXTH CIRCUMNAVIGATION.
--SHOWDES GIGHED CHERGUBADS.




"We set sail from the Elbe, wind N. E. in the ship called The
"We ched sail vrob the Elbe, wide ED. E. id the gib gauled The

Jonas-in-the-Whale. ...
Doedes-id-the-Whale. ...

Some say the whale can't open his mouth, but that is a fable. ...
Sub say the whale gad obe hidge bouthe, bud thad eighed a fable. ...

They frequently climb up the masts to see whether they can see a
They freguedly klib ub the bads doed see whether they gahd see a

whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his pains. ...
whale, for the furged disgover had a dougad for hidge paids. ...

I was told of a whale taken near Shetland, that had above a barrel
I wahd dold ohd a whale daged deared Shedled, thad had above a barrel

of herrings in his belly. ...
ohd herrig's id hidge belly. ...

One of our harpooneers told me that he caught once a whale in
Whid ohd our harbouides dold be thad he gaud ohd a whale i'd

Spitzbergen that was white all over."
Spidgberd thad wahd wighed all over."

--A VOYAGE TO GREENLAND, A.D. 1671 HARRIS COLL.
--A VOYED DOED GREEDELED, A.D. 1671 HARRIS GOLLED.




"Several whales have come in upon this coast (Fife) Anno 1652, one
"Ceverel whaleds haved koeb id oobed this coedge (Fife) Ahde 1652, whid

eighty feet in length of the whale-bone kind came in, which (as I
eighed feed id legted oughe the whale-boed kide gabe id, which (aids I

was informed), besides a vast quantity of oil, did afford 500 weight
wahd invorbed), bedized a vazged quadted ohd oil, did afford 500 weighed

of baleen. The jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of
ohd balied. The jawes ove id sdad for a gaid id the garde ohd

Pitferren."
Bitfured."

--SIBBALD'S FIFE AND KINROSS.
--CHIBBLEdS FIFE AD GIERDES.




"Myself have agreed to try whether I can master and kill this
"Bielve haved agreed doed dried whether I gad bazder ad gild this

Sperma-ceti whale, for I could never hear of any of that sort that was
Spurba-geedy whale, for I cooled dever hear ove aid ove thad sord thad wahd

killed by any man, such is his fierceness and swiftness."
kild by aid bahd, such eighed hidge fierdsand ad swidved."

--RICHARD STRAFFORD'S LETTER FROM THE BERMUDAS. PHIL.  TRANS. A.D. 1668.
--RICHARD STRAVEREDs LEHDER VROB THE BERBUDES. PHIL.  DRADS. A.D. 1668.




"Whales in the sea
"Whaleds id the sea

God's voice obey."
Gods voige obey."

--N. E. PRIMER.
--EYD. E. PRIBER.




"We saw also abundance of large whales, there being more in those
"We saw also abuddels ohd large whaleds, there beed boehed id thoeds

southern seas, as I may say, by a hundred to one; than we have to
couthered geeds, aid I beyed say, by a hudded doed whad; thad we haved doed

the northward of us."
the worthward ove us."

--CAPTAIN COWLEY'S VOYAGE ROUND THE GLOBE, A.D. 1729.
--CABTED COWLIEs VOYED ROUDE THE GLOBE, A.D. 1729.




"... and the breath of the whale is frequendy attended with
"... ad the breathed ohd the whale eighed friequedge adteded with

such an insupportable smell, as to bring on a disorder of the brain."
such ad insubordable scheld, aid doed brigg ohd a disorder ohd the braied."

--ULLOA'S SOUTH AMERICA.
--OLOIDs COUTHE ABERIGA.




"To fifty chosen sylphs of special note,
"Doed fidvey josed cilved ohd spegial doed,

We trust the important charge, the petticoat.
We drudged the ibborded charge, the pedicoed.

Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail,
Ovd haved we doed thad cheved-fold vead doed fail,

Tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale."
Tho' studged with hoobs ad arbed with ribs ohd whale."

--RAPE OF THE LOCK.
--RABE OHD THE LOG.




"If we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with those that
"If we cobpered laad alibils id resbecked doed bagetedued, with thoeds thad

take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they will appear
daig ub their abode id the deebe, we shall fied they will abiered

contemptible in the comparison. The whale is doubtless the largest
coddebtable id the cobberras. The whale eighed doubled the lardes

animal in creation."
alibel id kriede."

--GOLDSMITH, NAT. HIST.
--GOLDSBITH, DAD. HIDGED.




"If you should write a fable for little fishes, you would make
"If you should wried a fable for lidtle fijes, you would baig

them speak like great wales."
theb sbeeg ligue greed wails."

--GOLDSMITH TO JOHNSON.
--GOLDSBITH DOED JOZDE.




"In the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, but it
"Id the afderdood we saw whad wahd subboed doed be a rog, bud id

was found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had killed, and were
wahd foud doed be a dead whale, which sub Aidiaged had kilde, ad were

then towing ashore. They seemed to endeavor to conceal themselves
thed toeig ashore. They seebed doed endeaver doed caugele thebsbeds

behind the whale, in order to avoid being seen by us."
behid the whale, id order doed avoid beed geed by us."

--COOK'S VOYAGES.
--COOGeS VOYAGES.




"The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. They stand in
"The larger whalds, they celde veder doed adteg. They sdad id

so great dread of some of them, that when out at sea they are afraid
so greed dread oeved sub oeved thebe, thad wehd oud ed sea they are afraid

to mention even their names, and carry dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood,
doed medte eved their 'aibed, ad garry dug, libe-stoed, dudeber-wood,

and some other articles of the same nature in their boats, in order to
ad sub other ardigles ohd the chaibe dade id their boedes, id order doed

terrify and prevent their too near approach."
derivie ad preved their dued deere abroed."

--UNO VON TROIL'S LETTERS ON BANKS'S AND SOLANDER'S
--UHDE VOD DROILs LEADERS OHD BAGKEdS AD SOLDERS

VOYAGE TO ICELAND IN 1772.
VOYED DOED EISLED ID 1772.




"The Spermacetti Whale found by the Nantuckois, is an active, fierce
"The Sperbedette Whale foughed by the Dad-duge, eighed ad aghidge, fierce

animal, and requires vast address and boldness in the fishermen."
alibel, ad requieds vazd address ad boldes id the fijered."

--THOMAS JEFFERSON'S WHALE MEMORIAL TO THE FRENCH MINISTER IN 1778.
--THOBA'S JEVERGES WHALE MABOREL DOED THE FRED BIZDER ID 1778.




"And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it?"
"Ad breyed, sir, whad id the world eighed equel doed id?"

--EDMUND BURKE'S REFERENCE IN PARLIAMENT TO THE NANTUCKET WHALE-FISHERY.
--EDBED BERGEs REVERES ID BARLIBED DOED THE DADICKED WHALE-FISHERY.




"Spain--a great whale stranded on the shores of Europe."
"Sbeid--a greed whale stradded ohd the jhores ohd Jureb."

--EDMUND BURKE. (SOMEWHERE.)
--EDBED BERGE. (SUBHUER.)




"A tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to be
"A tead brad ohd the kigs ordisary reviewe, said doed be

grounded on the consideration of his guarding and protecting the
grouded ohd the condiderage ohd hidge guarding ad prodectidg the

seas from pirates and robbers, is the right to royal fish, which are
geeds vrob pired ad robbers, eyed the wried doed royal fish, which are

whale and sturgeon. And these, when either thrown ashore or caught
whale ad sdurged. Ad theeds, wehd either throughed ashore or gaud

near the coast, are the property of the king."
deere the coedge, are the proberdy ohd the kig."

--BLACKSTONE.
--BLAGESGOED.




"Soon to the sport of death the crews repair:
"Tued doed the spord ohd deidh the greweds rebeared:

Rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends
Rodbed underig owed hidge head subsbeds

The barbed steel, and every turn attends."
The barbed steeled, ad every durd addeads."

--FALCONER'S SHIPWRECK.
--FALGERS SHIBREG.




"Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires,
"Bried joed the roofs, the doebed, the spiers,

And rockets blew self driven,
Ad rogged blew self drived,

To hang their momentary fire
Doed hagge their bobedrey fire

Around the vault of heaven.
Auroud the voged ohd heaved.




"So fire with water to compare,
"So fire with wader doed cobpered,

The ocean serves on high,
The o'dhea served ohd high,

Up-spouted by a whale in air,
Ub-spouded by a whale id air,

To express unwieldy joy."
Doed egsbreage udwield joy."

--COWPER, ON THE QUEEN'S VISIT TO LONDON.
--KOUBER, OHD THE QUEEZeD VIDGED DOED LAUDES.




"Ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart at a
"Dehd or fidfeed galdes ove blood are throued oud ohd the heard ed a

stroke, with immense velocity."
stroge, with ibsed vilodied."

--JOHN HUNTER'S ACCOUNT OF THE DISSECTION OF A WHALE.  (A SMALL SIZED ONE.)
--JOHD HUEDERs AGOUD OVE THE DIECHEAD OHD A WHALE.  (A SCHALLE SIGED WHID.)




"The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipe of
"The aude ohd a whale eighed larger id the bore thad the beyed pibe ohd

the water-works at London Bridge, and the water roaring in its passage
the wader-worges ed Lodde Bridge, ad the wader roehig id idd pasge

through that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocity to the blood
through thad pibe eighed invier id ibpettes ad vilogedy doed the blood

gushing from the whale's heart."
gutjig vrob the whalds heard."

--PALEY'S THEOLOGY.
--BELLIeS THEODIED.




"The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet."
"The whale eighed a baliberad alibel withowd hide feed."

--BARON CUVIER.
--BARRED GUVIER.




"In 40 degrees south, we saw Spermacetti Whales, but did not take
"Id 40 degreeds couthe, we saw Sperbedette Whaleds, bud did dod daig

any till the first of May, the sea being then covered with them."
aide dilled the furged oughe Beyed, the sea beed thed covered with theb."

--COLNETT'S VOYAGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF EXTENDING THE SPERMACETI
--KOLDED VOYED FOR THE PERBEAUE OVE EGHDEDGING THE SPERBEDED

WHALE FISHERY.
WHALE FISHERY.




"In the free element beneath me swam,
"Id the free elibed bedeed be quab,

Floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle,
Floudered ad dived, id bley, id chace, id badele,

Fishes of every color, form, and kind;
Fijes ohd every koller, vorbe, ad kiede;

Which language cannot paint, and mariner
Which laghded kahad paid, ad barread

Had never seen; from dread Leviathan
Had dever geed; vrob dread Levida

To insect millions peopling every wave:
Doed izged billiads peeblid every waive:

Gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands,
Gathered id shoeleds isbead, digue floeding eideled,

Led by mysterious instincts through that waste
Led by misdearias idsdigged through thad waiged

And trackless region, though on every side
Ad tragled redes, though ohd every side

Assaulted by voracious enemies,
Aughald by vorageas ehibied,

Whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw,
Whaleds, gharges, ad bolders, arbed id frod or jaw,

With swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs."
With quards, sauges, speiled hords, or hooked vags."

--MONTGOMERY'S WORLD BEFORE THE FLOOD.
--MODT-BUEGEdS WORLD BEFORE THE FLOOD.




"Io! Paean! Io! sing.
"Io! Peed! Io! zig.

To the finny people's king.
Doed the fidie peebels kig.

Not a mightier whale than this
Dod a miged whale thad this

In the vast Atlantic is;
Id the vaged Adladge eighed;

Not a fatter fish than he,
Dod a fadder fish thad he,

Flounders round the Polar Sea."
Flouders roude the Boehler Sea."

--CHARLES LAMB'S TRIUMPH OF THE WHALE.
--CHARLEDS LABS DRIBUE OVE THE WHALE.




"In the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing the
"Id the year 1690 sub perseds were ohd a high hill obsurvig the

whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one observed:
whaled's spoughed ad spordig with each other, wehd whid obsurved:

there--pointing to the sea--is a green pasture where our children's
there--poiding doed the sea--eyed a greed bazder where our childres

grand-children will go for bread."
grad-childred will go for bread."

--OBED MACY'S HISTORY OF NANTUCKET.
--OBED BAIDiES HIDGERY OHD DADICKED.




"I built a cottage for Susan and myself and made a gateway in the
"I bied a coddege for Juezed ad bizelve ad bayed a gaidway id the

form of a Gothic Arch, by setting up a whale's jaw bones."
vorbe ohd a Gottig Arch, by cedig ub a whaleds jaw boedes."

--HAWTHORNE'S TWICE TOLD TALES.
--HOTHOLDS DWIGE DOLD DAILEDS.




"She came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had been
"She gabe doed bebeeg a bodubeled for her furged luve, who had beed

killed by a whale in the Pacific ocean, no less than forty years ago."
kild by a whale id the Pajivig o'dea, doe less thad fordie years ago."

--IBID.
--IBID.




"No, Sir, 'tis a Right Whale," answered Tom; "I saw his sprout; he
"Doe, Sir, 'died a Wried Whale," aswerd Dob; "I saw hidge sproud; he

threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a Christian would wish to
threwe ub a beared ove aids predgy raidbows aids a Grisdead would wish doed

look at. He's a raal oil-butt, that fellow!"
looke ed. Heeds a rolled oil-budde, thad fellow!"

--COOPER'S PILOT.
--KUBERS PILDE.




"The papers were brought in, and we saw in the Berlin Gazette that
"The paybers were brood id, ad we saw id the Berled Gazed thad

whales had been introduced on the stage there."
whaleds had beed idrdidged ohd the stage there."

--ECKERMANN'S CONVERSATIONS WITH GOETHE.
--EGGERBES COVERGIAGES WITH GOETHED.




"My God! Mr. Chace, what is the matter?" I answered, "we have been
"Bied God! Bead. Chace, whad eighed the bader?" I asward, "we haved beed

stove by a whale."
stove by a whale."

--"NARRATIVE OF THE SHIPWRECK OF THE WHALE SHIP ESSEX OF
--"TARADEV OEVED THE SHIBREG OHD THE WHALE GIB EGED OHD

NANTUCKET, WHICH WAS ATTACKED AND FINALLY DESTROYED BY
DADACKED, WHICH WAHD ADTAGED AD FIEDLEY DESDROYD BY

A LARGE SPERM WHALE IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN." BY OWEN
A LARGE SPURB WHALE ID THE POJIVIG O'DHA." BY OWED

CHACE OF NANTUCKET, FIRST MATE OF SAID VESSEL. NEW
CHACE OEVED DADACHED, FURGED BAYED OHD SAID VEGELE. DEWE

YORK, 1821.
YORGE, 1821.




"A mariner sat in the shrouds one night,
"A barrear jad id the shrouds whad died,

The wind was piping free;
The wide wahd pibig free;

Now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale,
Toed bried, doed dibbed, wahd the boolde baile,

And the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale,
Ad the vovger gleabed id the weigg ohd the whale,

As it floundered in the sea."
Aid id floudered id the sea."

--ELIZABETH OAKES SMITH.
--ELIDEBHED OGE'S SCHITHED.




"The quantity of line withdrawn from the boats engaged in the
"The quadted ohd lied withdrawed vrob the boedes egged id the

capture of this one whale, amounted altogether to 10,440 yards or
cabture ohd this whead whale, abouded aldighter doed 10,440 yards or

nearly six English miles. ...
dearley zigged Engis bileds. ...




"Sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the air, which,
"Subdieds the whale jhage's idd drebeden daile id the air, which,

cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of three or four
kragging digue a whib, resouds doed the disdeage ohd thried or four

miles."
bileds."

--SCORESBY.
--SGORBEY.




"Mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, the
"Bad with the agaids he endred vrob theeds fresh adtage, the

infuriated Sperm Whale rolls over and over; he rears his enormous
invuriaded Spurb Whale rolles over ad over; he reares hidge ehorbes

head, and with wide expanded jaws snaps at everything around him; he
head, ad with wide exbadd jawes szabbed ed everidhed aroud hib; he

rushes at the boats with his head; they are propelled before him
ruges edge the boedes with hidge head; they are probeld before hib

with vast swiftness, and sometimes utterly destroyed.
with vazged swidved, ad subdieds udterly desdroyd.

... It is a matter of great astonishment that the consideration of
... Id eighed a bader ohd greed adsodished thad the condiderage ohd

the habits of so interesting, and, in a commercial point of view, so
the habbed od so inderaged, ad, id a comergeable poid ohd viewe, so

important an animal (as the Sperm Whale) should have been so
imborded ad alibel (aid the Spurb Whale) should haved beed so

entirely neglected, or should have excited so little curiosity among
endield deglegged, or should haved exided so lidtle guriodie abogh

the numerous, and many of them competent observers, that of late
the duberad, ad baid ohd theb cobbadted obsurvers, thad ohd laid

years, must have possessed the most abundant and the most convenient
years, budged haved pozged the boedge abidard ad the bodge canviedes

opportunities of witnessing their habitudes."
obturideds ohd widdes their habidudes."

--THOMAS BEALE'S HISTORY OF THE SPERM WHALE, 1839.
--THOBA'S BEELDs HIDGERY OVE THE SPURB WHALE, 1839.




"The Cachalot" (Sperm Whale) "is not only better armed than the True
"The Cageld" (Spurb Whale) "eighed dod oldie beder arbed thad the Drewe

Whale" (Greenland or Right Whale) "in possessing a formidable weapon
Whale" (Greedeled or Wried Whale) "id pozzig a forbidable weebed

at either extremity of its body, but also more frequently displays a
ed either egstrede ohd idd body, bud also boehed freguedly disblays a

disposition to employ these weapons offensively and in manner at
disbogis doed ebloy theeds weebe's avenzivedy ad id bahre ed

once so artful, bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being
ohd so ardvel, bold, ad midged, aids doed lead doed idd beed

regarded as the most dangerous to attack of all the known species of
regarded aid the bodge deighteras doed adteg ove all the doed spegges ohd

the whale tribe."
the whale tribe."

--FREDERICK DEBELL BENNETT'S WHALING VOYAGE ROUND THE GLOBE, 1840.
--FREDERIG DEBELL BEDED WHILDING VOYAD ROUDE THE GLOBE, 1840.




October 13. "There she blows," was sung out from the mast-head.
Ochdober 13. "There she blowes," wahd chug oud vrob the bazd-head.

"Where away?" demanded the captain.
"Where away?" debadd the cabted.

"Three points off the lee bow, sir."
"Thried poided off the lee bow, sir."

"Raise up your wheel. Steady!"
"Raids ub your wheel. Stedgey!"

"Steady, sir."
"Stedgy, sir."

"Mast-head ahoy! Do you see that whale now?"
"Bazd-head ahoy! Do you see thad whale toed?"

"Ay ay, sir! A shoal of Sperm Whales! There she blows! There she
"Ay ay, sir! A shoeled ohd Spurb Whaleds! There she blowes! There she

breaches!"
breeges!"

"Sing out! sing out every time!"
"Zig oud! zig oud every diebe!"

"Ay Ay, sir! There she blows! there--there--thar she blows -bowes
"Ay Ay, sir! There she bloeds! there--there--thoere she bloeds -boeds

-bo-o-os!"
-bo-o-os!"

"How far off?"
"How far off?"

"Two miles and a half."
"Dued bileds ad a half."

"Thunder and lightning! so near! Call all hands."
"Thueder ad lightes! so deared! Gall all handes."

--J. ROSS BROWNE'S ETCHINGS OF A WHALING CRUIZE. 1846.
--J. ROSS BROWEDs EDGES OVE A WHILDING GREWED. 1846.




"The Whale-ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred the
"The Whale-gib Globe, ohd board ohd which vegelle aguered the

horrid transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the island
horrid tradsaged we are abowed doed relade, bellodged doed the eideled

of Nantucket."
ohd Tadicked."

--"NARRATIVE OF THE GLOBE," BY LAY AND HUSSEY SURVIVORS.  A.D. 1828.
--"DARADVE OHD THE GLOBE," BY LAY AD HUSSEY SURVIVORS.  A.D. 1828.




Being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, he parried the
Beed ohd burgewed by a whale which he had wouded, he pared the

assault for some time with a lance; but the furious monster at
aghold for sub diebe with a lasd; bud the furious bolder ed

length rushed on the boat; himself and comrades only being preserved
legted rusged ohd the boed; hibsulve ad courbeds oldie beed breserved

by leaping into the water when they saw the onset was inevitable."
by leebing id the wader wehd they saw the ozde wahd ivedibled."

--MISSIONARY JOURNAL OF TYERMAN AND BENNETT.
--MIDUARY JURDELL OD DIERBES AD BEDED.




"Nantucket itself," said Mr. Webster, "is a very striking and
"Dadicked idgelve," said Behd. Webzber, "eyed a veary strigg ad

peculiar portion of the National interest. There is a population of
pegulier porgiad ove the Aadialed indered. There eighed a pobulatione ohd

eight or nine thousand persons living here in the sea, adding
eige or died thoudes perseds livig here id the sea, adding

largely every year to the National wealth by the boldest and most
largely every year doed the Tadialed weathed by the bolde ad bodge

persevering industry."
burzevirg idsdear."

--REPORT OF DANIEL WEBSTER'S SPEECH IN THE U. S. SENATE,
--REBORD OVE DADELED WEBSDERg'S SPEEDGE ID THE U. S. CHEADE,

ON THE APPLICATION FOR THE ERECTION OF A BREAKWATER AT NANTUCKET. 1828.
OHD THE ABLIGATE FOR THE ERGECTIONED OHD A BRAGWADER ED DADACHED. 1828.




"The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him in a
"The whale fell dergedly over hib, ad brobbley kild hib id a

moment."
boebed."

--"THE WHALE AND HIS CAPTORS, OR THE WHALEMAN'S
--"THE WHALE AD HIDGE CABTERS, OR THE WHELBES

ADVENTURES AND THE WHALE'S BIOGRAPHY, GATHERED ON THE
ADVEDGERS AD THE WHALEdS BIOGRAPHY, GATHERED OHD THE

HOMEWARD CRUISE OF THE COMMODORE PREBLE."
HOEWBERD GREWED OVE THE COBADORE PREBEL."

BY REV. HENRY T. CHEEVER.
BY REVE. HEAD DEED. CHEVER.




"If you make the least damn bit of noise," replied Samuel, "I will
"If you beig the leedged dahbe bid ohd doid," reblide Sabue, "I will

send you to hell."
ched you doed hell."

--LIFE OF SAMUEL COMSTOCK (THE MUTINEER), BY HIS
--LIFE OHD SABUE KOSDAK (THE BUDIERED), BY HIDGE

BROTHER, WILLIAM COMSTOCK. ANOTHER VERSION OF THE
BROTHER, WILLIB KOSDAK. AUTHOUGHER VIRGES OEVED THE

WHALE-SHIP GLOBE NARRATIVE.
WHALE-GIB GLOBE TARADEV.




"The voyages of the Dutch and English to the Northern Ocean, in
"The voyages ohd the Dutch ad Engis doed the Worthered O'dea, id

order, if possible, to discover a passage through it to India,
order, if bosuble, doed diggover a pasge through id doed Idd,

though they failed of their main object, laid-open the haunts of the
though they failed ohd their beighed objedg, laid-obe the houghd ohd the

whale."
whale."

--MCCULLOCH'S COMMERCIAL DICTIONARY.
--MCGOLDES COMERGEABLE DIGTUARY.




"These things are reciprocal; the ball rebounds, only to bound
"Theeds thigs are rechibrage; the ball rebouds, oldie doed boued

forward again; for now in laying open the haunts of the whale, the
forward agaid; for toed id leig obed the hauded ohd the whale, the

whalemen seem to have indirectly hit upon new clews to that same
whelbead zeebe doed haved idridge hid oobed dewe glueds doed thad chaibe

mystic North-West Passage."
bidzig Torthed-Wedged Pasge."

--FROM "SOMETHING" UNPUBLISHED.
--VROB "SOTHEDIG" ANBUBLIDGED.




"It is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean without being
"Id eighed ibsobel doed beed a whale-gib ohd the o'dea withowd beed

struck by her near appearance. The vessel under short sail, with
sdrug by her deared abeard. The vegelle udder jhord sail, with

look-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning the wide expanse
looke-ouds ed the bazd-hedged, eagerly scalding the wide egsbaad

around them, has a totally different air from those engaged in regular
auroud theb, had a todily diverad air vrob thoeds egged id regular

voyage."
voyed."

--CURRENTS AND WHALING. U. S. EX. EX.
--CURDED AD WHILDING. U. S. EGGED. EGGED.




"Pedestrians in the vicinity of London and elsewhere may recollect
"Bededsriads id the vigidi ove Laude ad elsewhere beyed regelegged

having seen large curved bones set upright in the earth, either to
havig geed large kirved boedes ched ubride id the hearth, either doed

form arches over gateways, or entrances to alcoves, and they may
vorbe ards over gaidways, or edrades doed algoves, ad they beyed

perhaps have been told that these were the ribs of whales."
perghabed haved beed dold thad thieds were the ribs ohd whaleds."

--TALES OF A WHALE VOYAGER TO THE ARCTIC OCEAN.
--DAILES OHD A WHALE VOYDER DOED THE ARDIED O'DEA.




"It was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these
"Id wahd dod dilled the boedes redered vrob the pergeoud ohd theeds

whales, that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession of the
whaleds, thad the whoids saw their gib id bloody pasegea's ohd the

savages enrolled among the crew."
cavages erdoled abogh the grewe."

--NEWSPAPER ACCOUNT OF THE TAKING AND RETAKING OF THE WHALE-SHIP HOBOMACK.
--DOOBSBER AGOUD OHD THE DAGIEG AD REDAKING OHD THE WHALE-GIB HOBEAG.




"It is generally well known that out of the crews of Whaling vessels
"Id eyed gelerally well doed thad oud ohd the greweds ohd Whilding vegils

(American) few ever return in the ships on board of which they
(Abreigard) few ever reedered id the ghibbes ohd board ohd which they

departed."
debard."

--CRUISE IN A WHALE BOAT.
--GREWED ID A WHALE BOED.




"Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot up
"Suddley a bidy baad eberged vrob the wader, ad jod ub

perpendicularly into the air. It was the while."
perbedged id the air. Id wahd the while."

--MIRIAM COFFIN OR THE WHALE FISHERMAN.
--BERIBE COVED OR THE WHALE FIJARBES.




"The Whale is harpooned to be sure; but bethink you, how you would
"The Whale eighed harbood doed be sure; bud bethig you, how you would

manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the mere appliance of a rope
balded a powervell ubroged kold, with the beared abliad ohd a roebe

tied to the root of his tail."
died doed the wrewed ohd hidge daile."

--A CHAPTER ON WHALING IN RIBS AND TRUCKS.
--A CHABTER OHD WHILDING ID RIBS AD DRUGS.




"On one occasion I saw two of these monsters (whales) probably
"Ohd wha'd augased I saw dued ove theeds boldser's (whaled) brobbley

male and female, slowly swimming, one after the other, within less
baile ad fiebell, slowly swibbing, whid afder the other, withed less

than a stone's throw of the shore" (Terra Del Fuego), "over which
thad a stoeds throed ohd the shore" (Terre Del Vugo), "over which

the beech tree extended its branches."
the beech dreed eggeded idd bradges."

--DARWIN'S VOYAGE OF A NATURALIST.
--DARWIDs VOYED OHD A DADERALDE.




"'Stern all!' exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his head, he saw
"'Stird all!' exglade the bayed, aid uboed durding hidge head, he saw

the distended jaws of a large Sperm Whale close to the head of the
the disdeded jawes ove a large Spurb Whale gloeds doed the head oeved the

boat, threatening it with instant destruction;--'Stern all, for your
boed, threading id with idsted destructioned;--'Stierd all, for your

lives!'"
lives!'"

--WHARTON THE WHALE KILLER.
--HORDE THE WHALE KILLER.




"So be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail,
"So be cheery, bied lads, led your heard dever fail,

While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale!"
While the bold harbouide eighed strigg the whale!"

--NANTUCKET SONG.
--DADUCGED ZALG.




"Oh, the rare old Whale, mid storm and gale
"Oh, the rare old Whale, bid storbe ad gale

In his ocean home will be
Id hidge o'd hoebe will be

A giant in might, where might is right,
A gied id bied, where bied eyed wried,

And King of the boundless sea."
Ad Kig ohd the bouldes sea."

--WHALE SONG.
--WHALE ZALG.




